medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Living alone, loneliness and lack of emotional support as
          predictors of suicide and self-harm: a nine-year follow up of the
          UK Biobank cohort
          Authors: Richard J. Shaw1, Breda Cullen1, Nicholas Graham1, Donald M. Lyall1, Daniel Mackay1,
          Chukwudi Okolie2, Robert Pearsall1,3, Joey Ward1, Ann John2, Daniel J. Smith1
          1. Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, UK.
          2. Institute of Life Sciences, Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
          3. Department of Psychiatry, Monklands Hospital, Airdrie, UK.
          Declarations of interest: none.
          Correspondence to:
          Dr. Richard Shaw
          Address: Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Public Health, 1 Lilybank Gardens,
          Glasgow, G12 8RZ, UK.
          Telephone: +44 (0) 141 330 2334.
          Email: Richard.Shaw@glasgow.ac.uk.
                                                                         1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Highlights
               •     First cohort study to investigate loneliness’s relationship with deaths by suicide
               •     Loneliness is associated with a modest increased risk of death by suicide for men
               •     For men, living with a partner reduces the risk of death by suicide
               •     Loneliness increases the risk of hospitalization for self-harm for men and women
                                                                        2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Abstract
          Background: The association between loneliness and suicide is poorly understood. We investigated
          how living alone, loneliness and emotional support were related to suicide and self-harm in a
          longitudinal design.
          Methods: Between 2006 and 2010 UK Biobank recruited and assessed in detail over 0.5 million
          people in middle age. Data were linked to prospective hospital admission and mortality records.
          Adjusted Cox regression models were used to investigate relationships between living arrangements,
          loneliness and emotional support, and both suicide and self-harm as outcomes.
          Results: For men, both living alone (Hazard Ratio (HR) 2.16, 95%CI 1.51-3.09) and living with non-
          partners (HR 1.80, 95%CI 1.08-3.00) were associated with death by suicide, independently of
          loneliness, which had a modest relationship with suicide (HR 1.43, 95%CI 0.1.01-2.03). For women,
          there was no evidence that living arrangements, loneliness or emotional support were associated
          with death by suicide. Associations between living alone and self-harm were explained by health for
          women, and by health, loneliness and emotional support for men. In fully adjusted models,
          loneliness was associated with hospital admissions for self-harm in both women (HR 1.89, 95%CI
          1.57-2.28) and men (HR 1.74, 95%CI 1.40-2.16).
          Limitations: Loneliness and emotional support were operationalized using single item measures.
          Conclusions: For men - but not for women - living alone or living with a non-partner increased the
          risk of suicide, a finding not explained by subjective loneliness. Overall, loneliness may be more
          important as a risk factor for self-harm than for suicide. Loneliness also appears to lessen the
          protective associations of cohabitation.
          Keywords
          Loneliness, Suicide, Self-harm, Living arrangements, Emotional support.
                                                                        3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          INTRODUCTION
          Loneliness, defined as the subjective perception of a lack of contact with other people (HM
          Government, 2018; Perlman and Peplau, 1981), is associated with premature mortality (Elovainio et
          al., 2017; Rico-Uribe et al., 2018), physical and mental ill-health, worse cognitive function (Cacioppo
          et al., 2014; Hakulinen et al., 2018; Hawkley and Cacioppo, 2010; Solmi et al., 2020) and increased
          use of health services (Dreyer et al., 2018). Loneliness affects people of all ages (Age UK, 2018) and
          has been made a ministerial responsibility by the UK government (HM Government, 2018). While
          living alone has been consistently linked with self-harm and suicide, it is currently not clear whether
          subjective loneliness per se is the primary reason why people living alone may be at increased risk of
          suicidal behaviour.
          Living alone and loneliness indicate relationships and social connections, nonetheless they are
          separate constructs with overlapping features (Smith and Victor, 2019). Living alone is distinct from
          cohabitating relationships, as well as residency with non-partners such as parents, children or
          friends, who might be expected to be sources of emotional, financial and practical support (Amato,
          2014; van Hedel et al., 2018). However, clearly people living alone may engage with others outside
          the household and potentially receive emotional support from other sources. In contrast, loneliness
          is the subjective perception of a lack of contact with other people (Hawkley and Cacioppo, 2010).
          Emotional support is a related concept. It involves the provision of caring, empathy, love and trust
          within a relationship (Langford et al., 1997) and indicates that somebody is taken care of, valued, not
          alone and has somebody to confide in (Shensa et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2015).
          Theories that would support a relationship between suicide and loneliness, living arrangements and
          lack of emotional support, trace back to the work of Durkheim (Stanley et al., 2016). In particular,
          egoistic suicide is described as a lack of social integration because of reasons such as an individual’s
          lack of social bonds to family and friends. These ideas have been developed further in modern
          theories such as the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide. One aspect of the Interpersonal Theory of
          Suicide of particular relevance is the concept of ‘thwarted belongingness’ which suggests that
          loneliness along with the absence emotional support can lead to self-destructive behaviours (Stanley
          et al., 2016; Van Orden et al., 2010). However, there is little empirical research in this area (Van
          Orden et al., 2010). Identifying robust risk factors for suicidal behaviour is methodologically
          challenging for a number of reasons, not least because suicide is a rare event (Klonsky et al., 2016;
          Stickley and Koyanagi, 2016). Most studies of loneliness and suicidal behaviour have used self-
          reported measures of suicidality (Bennardi et al., 2019), which may be prone to reporting biases
          (Beutel et al., 2017; Stickley and Koyanagi, 2016), and only a few studies (mostly case-control
          studies) have investigated loneliness as a potential cause of deaths by suicide (Courtin and Knapp,
          2017; Holt-Lunstad et al., 2015).
          The extensive data within the UK Biobank cohort represents a unique opportunity to overcome
          these methodological challenges. The cohort consists of over half a million people, and the baseline
          questionnaire included detailed questions on living arrangements, loneliness and emotional support,
          in addition to key sociodemographic and health data. These data have also been linked prospectively
          to hospital episode statistics and mortality records (Sudlow et al., 2015).
          Our primary hypothesis was that living alone may represent an independent risk factor for self-harm
          and suicide. We also set out to assess whether any observed association between living alone and
          suicidal behaviour might be explained by subjective loneliness or by perceived lack of emotional
          support.
                                                                        4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          METHODS
          Data
          All adults aged between 40-70 years who were registered with the UK National Health Service (NHS)
          and living within 25 miles of 22 assessment centres across England, Scotland and Wales were invited
          to participate in UK Biobank at baseline. The achieved sample of 502,536 people had a response rate
          of 5.5% (Sudlow et al., 2015) and an age range of between 37 and 73. Participants were recruited
          between March 2006 and October 2010 (Sudlow et al., 2015) and for each participant baseline
          assessments consisted of a single visit lasting approximately two to three hours, including a
          computerised self-completion touch screen questionnaire, nurse interviews, and physical
          measurements. For all participants, the date and cause of death were sought from death certificates
          held within the National Health Service Information Centre (England and Wales), and National
          Health Service Central Register Scotland. At the time of analysis, mortality data were available up to
          the middle of February 2018 for England and Wales and until June 2017 for Scotland. Data for
          Hospital admission records for self-harm were only available for participants in England and for the
          period up to March 2015, thus analyses for self-harm were restricted to those who attended a
          Biobank assessment centre in England (n = 448,811). This study is covered by the generic ethical
          approval for UK Biobank studies from the National Health Service National Research Ethics Service
          (June 17, 2011; Ref 11/NW/0382). Participants provided electronic informed consent for the
          baseline assessments and the register linkage.
          Outcomes
          Death by suicide       was defined as the act of intentionally ending one’s own life (Nock et al., 2008) and
          was ascertained from death records using ICD 10 codes X60-X84 (intentional self-harm), Y10-34
          (undetermined cause), as used by the UK Office for National Statistics (2019). Participants dying from
          other causes of death were censored at time of death.
          Hospital admissions for self-harm          were defined as any act of intentional self-poisoning or self-injury
          carried out by an individual, irrespective of the motivation or suicidal intent (National Collaborating
          Centre for Mental Health, 2012). This was assessed using the first admission for self-harm following
          attendance at the UK Biobank baseline assessment centre. Hospitalization for self-harm was
          assessed using ICD 10 codes X60 to-84 and Z91.5, for diagnosis and causes of admissions.
          Main exposures of interest
          Living arrangements (alone; husband, wife or partner; other) were assessed using data from the
          baseline touch screen questionnaire collected when participants first attended a UK Biobank
          assessment centre. Participants were asked how many people lived in their household. If there was
          more than one person, the participant was then asked how people were related to them. If any
          member of the household was a spouse or partner, participants were classified as living with a
          husband, wife or partner. The other category included both relatives and unrelated people.
          Loneliness     was assessed using a single question taken from the baseline touchscreen questionnaire:
          “Do you often feel lonely?” (Responses: yes; no; do not know; prefer not to answer). This item was
          taken from a longer scale and has previously been shown to be associated with health outcomes
          (McCormack et al., 2014).
          Emotional Support         was assessed with the question “How often are you able to confide in someone
          close to you?” (Shensa et al., 2020). The potential responses were “Almost daily; 2-4 times a week;
          about once a week; about once a month or once every few months; never or almost never; do not
          know or prefer not answer” (the latter were coded as missing).
                                                                        5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Covariates
          We included sociodemographic and health variables which, which were collected during
          participants’ attendance at baseline assessment centres, and might confound relationships between
          the key variables of interest and death by suicide and hospital admissions for self-harm.
          The socio-demographic variables included were: sex, age (continuous), and self-reported measures
          of ethnicity (derived here into White British, other), current employment status, (employed, retired,
          other), education (degree; professional; NVQ, HND or HNC; A level; O level; CSE; none) ever having a
          same sex partner (none, at least one), and area deprivation indicated using the Townsend Index
          (continuous) for the participant’s postcode at recruitment.
          The health variables included were: a measure of multimorbidity, developed for a previous study
          (Nicholl et al., 2014) which was the number of physical morbidities participants reported to the
          interviewing nurse (zero, one, two, three or more); Body Mass Index (BMI) based on measurements
          made at the assessment centre (normal or underweight, overweight, obese); self-reported measure
          of depression based on of ever seeing a GP for nerves, anxiety tension or depression (yes, no);
          participants’ report during their baseline interview of taking psychotropic medication (yes/no);
          alcohol consumption (daily/almost daily, 3-4 days a week, 1-2 times a week /once a month, special
          occasions/never, former); and smoking status (never, previous, current).
          Statistical analysis
          Prior research (Kyung-Sook et al., 2018), and based on statistical interactions we found in
          preliminary analyses, indicated that gender modifies the relationship between the main exposures
          of interest and suicidality. Consequently, we carried out the analyses stratified by gender. Cox
          proportional hazards regression was used to investigate deaths by suicide. The proportional hazards
          assumption was tested for using Schoenfeld residuals. For hospital admissions due to self-harm,
          however, the proportional hazards assumption was not met for loneliness, so data were reanalysed
          using a Royston Parmar model (Royston and Lambert, 2011), with Akaike information criterion from
          preliminary analyses indicating that two knots should be used to model the baseline hazard, and
          single time varying parameter, for loneliness.
          For each participant the start date for the follow-up period used in analyses was the date of their
          first attendance at a UK Biobank centre at baseline, which ranged from March 2006 to October 2010.
          Participants were censored upon death, and for the death by suicide analyses, the last date
          (February 2018 for England and Wales and until June 2017 for Scotland) that mortality records were
          available, and for the analyses of self-harm, the last date (March 2015) that hospital records were
          available.
          Six different models are presented for both deaths by suicide and hospital admissions for self-harm.
          The first three models are presented for each of living arrangements, loneliness, and emotional
          support separately. Models 1 are univarable regression models only including each of the main
          independent variables. Models 2 adjust for all sociodemographic variables, and Models 3
          additionally adjust for the health variables. Model 4 adds loneliness and Model 5 adds emotional
          support to Model 3. In Model 6, all variables were included.
          We accounted for missing data using multiple imputation by chained equations, generating twenty
          imputed data sets. Imputation models were stratified by gender and included age, living
          arrangements, loneliness, emotional support, all variables used in the models, the Nelson-Aalen
          estimate of cumulative hazard, survival status (Cleves et al., 2016), and additional variables to
          improve model fit, including household income, participation in social groups, contact with friends
          and family, parental depression, limiting longstanding illness and self-rated health. These variables
                                                                        6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          were not included in the main models because they either had comparatively high rates of missing
          data which limited their utility in preliminary complete case analysis, or, in the case of health
          variables, might mediate the relationship between our exposures of interest and outcomes. Our
          models were fitted to each imputed data set and combined in accordance with Rubin’s rules. All
          analyses were carried out using Stata 16.0.
          RESULTS
          Sociodemographic characteristics of study participants by gender are shown in table 1. With respect
          to the main independent variables of interest, men were more likely to cohabit, whereas women
          were more likely to live alone or with non-partner(s). Women were somewhat more likely to report
          often feeling lonely, and men were much more likely to report that they never had any emotional
          support. Men were much more likely to have died by suicide (n=181, 8.9 deaths per 100,000
          participants per year) than women (n=85, 3.5 deaths per 100,000 participants per year). Among
          potential confounders, men were more likely than woman to be in both the most and least
          advantaged categories of the socioeconomic measures, and women generally had poorer health.
          Death by suicide
          The results of Cox proportional hazard models for deaths by suicide are shown in table 2. For men
          there were initially strong relationships, relative to cohabitation, between living alone or with a non-
          partner and death by suicide (model 1). These associations were attenuated after adjusting for
          sociodemographic factors (sex, age, ethnicity, employment status, area deprivation education, and
          ever had a same sex relationship (model 2) and health measures (physical morbidities, BMI, ever
          seen GP for depression, psychotropic medication, alcohol consumption and smoking status) (model
          3). Adjusting for loneliness (model 4) or emotional support (model 5) only led to a slight attenuation
          of associations, and in the final fully adjusted model (model 6) both living alone (Hazard Ratio (HR)
          2.02, 95% CI 1.40 to 293) and living with a person who was not a partner (HR 1.72, 95% CI 1.03 to
          2.88) were associated with death by suicide.
          The relationship between loneliness and low levels of emotional support and death by suicide,
          although relatively strong in unadjusted models (model 1), fell after adjustment for
          sociodemographic factors and health. Once living arrangements were accounted for, loneliness
          (model 4), and lower levels of emotional support (model 5) were only modestly associated with
          death by suicide. In contrast, for women, there was little evidence of any association between death
          by suicide and living arrangements, loneliness or emotional support.
          Finally, in fully adjusted models, we conducted interaction tests to assess whether the relationship
          between living arrangements and death by suicide was modified by loneliness or emotional support.
          For men, a Wald test indicated a significant interaction (p=0.002) between living arrangements and
          loneliness, presented in Figure 1a. Men who often experienced loneliness or those who were not
          lonely and living alone, or with a non-partner only, had three times the risk of dying by suicide
          compared to those who cohabit and are not lonely.
          Hospital admissions for self-harm
          The results for the Royston Parmar models for associations between hospital admissions for self-
          harm and living arrangements, loneliness and perceived emotional support are shown in table 3.
          For men, all of living arrangements, loneliness and perceived emotional support were associated
          with hospital admissions for self-harm in unadjusted analyses. The strength of these associations
          was reduced after adjusting for sociodemographic characteristics (model 2) and health measures
                                                                        7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          (model 3). Both loneliness (model 4) and lower levels of emotional support (model 5) explained part
          of the relationship between living alone and self-harm. In the final model, there was no evidence of
          an association between living alone and self-harm. In contrast, both lower levels of emotional
          support and loneliness were associated with increased risk of hospitalization for self-harm.
          Women differed from men in that the living arrangements categories had weaker relationships with
          self-harm within the unadjusted model (model 1). Furthermore, the associations for women were
          explained by health (model 3). For women, loneliness (model 4) and lower levels of perceived
          emotional support (model 5) were associated with increased risk of self-harm, independent of other
          factors (with the caveat that the relationship between lack of emotional supports and self-harm
          could be explained by loneliness).
          For men, adjusting for all confounders, we found a significant (p=0.023) interaction indicating that
          loneliness modified the relationship between living arrangements and hospitalization for self-harm.
          Overall, loneliness removed any protective associations of cohabitation over living alone, such that
          men who were often lonely had similarly increased HRs of hospitalization of around 2, irrespective of
          their living arrangements. In contrast, among men who did not report loneliness, living alone was
          associated with a modest increase in risk of hospitalization for self-harm (HR 1.32, 95% CI 0.95 to
          1.82) and a greater increase was found for those living only with non-partners (HR 1.88, 95% CI 1.24
          to 2.83) (see Figure 1b).
          DISCUSSION
          Our goal was to investigate the association between living arrangements, loneliness, perceived
          emotional support and subsequent risk of suicidal behaviours, within a large general population
          cohort in middle-age.
          For men, given that both living alone and living with a non-partner were both associated with an
          increased risk of death by suicide, it is possible that having a partner is protective against death by
          suicide. Subjective loneliness and perceived emotional support had modest relationships with death
          by suicide and these variables explained little of the relationship between living alone and death by
          suicide. For women, none of living arrangements, loneliness, nor emotional support were associated
          with death by suicide.
          For both men and women, loneliness and emotional support were associated with increased risk of
          hospitalization for self-harm. However, associations between living arrangements and self-harm
          were more limited, being explained by health for women, and health, loneliness and emotional
          support for men.
          Our study has some important novel findings. While loneliness has been linked to suicidal ideation
          and attempts (Stickley and Koyanagi, 2016), including within case-control studies (Sinclair et al.,
          2005), a recent systematic review (Solmi et al., 2020) suggests that our study is the first longitudinal
          study of its kind to investigate the relationship between loneliness and deaths by suicide. The
          absence of prior research is not a surprise given the methodological challenges of studying such rare
          outcomes as suicide (Van Orden et al., 2010).
          Our finding that deaths by suicide and hospital admissions for self-harm for men were associated
          with living arrangements, is consistent with the literature for marital status that finds that married
          or cohabiting people have lower risks of suicide compared to single people (Conejero et al., 2016;
          Frisch and Simonsen, 2013). Our study adds to this literature by showing that for men actually living
                                                                        8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          with a partner (not just from not living alone) appears to be associated with reduced risk of death by
          suicide and hospital admissions for self-harm. Demographic factors, such as the older age of the UK
          Biobank sample, could explain why we did not find any associations between living arrangements
          and suicide and self-harm for women. Kyung-Sook et al. (2018) found associations between marital
          status and suicide only among younger women.
          An original contribution of our study with respect to living arrangements is that most studies of
          suicidal behaviour focus on the concept that it is living alone that is harmful (Turecki and Brent,
          2016). However, our results indicate that both men who lived alone and with non-partners were at
          increased risk of dying by suicide and self-harm. Apart from Frisch and Simonsen’s (2013) study,
          which indicated that people living in households with more than nine people had increased risk of
          suicide, the focus has generally been on living alone as a risk factor, rather than other relationships.
          However, this is to some extent consistent with a wider literature which has found that those living
          alone and those living with people other than a partner are more likely to have anxiety or depressive
          disorders (Joutsenniemi et al., 2006).
          Another original contribution with respect to living arrangements is that our results are the first to
          indicate that the associations between living alone and self-harm might be explained by loneliness
          and emotional support. However, this does not appear to be the case for deaths by suicide. Such
          findings, particularly if replicated elsewhere, may have implications for theories that try to explain
          the psychological and social antecedents of suicidal behaviour.
          Implications
          As noted above, the rarity of death by suicide as an outcome has made it very difficult to investigate
          some theorised risks for death by suicide, as well as other relatively infrequent outcomes such as
          hospitalization for self-harm (Klonsky et al., 2016; Van Orden et al., 2010). Many of the theories
          proposed to explain the development of suicidal behaviour are based on studies investigating risk
          factors for other forms of suicidal behaviour, such as self-reported suicidal ideation or attempts.
          Clearly, the assumption that the risk factors for all types of suicidal thoughts and behaviours will be
          the same is problematic (DeJong et al., 2010; Klonsky et al., 2016). From a public health perspective,
          it is important to identify potentially causal and modifiable factors that may differ between death by
          suicide and other suicidal behaviours.
          This study clearly shows that, for men, living arrangements, loneliness and emotional support are
          important risk factors for both death by suicide and hospitalization for self-harm. For women,
          loneliness and lack of emotional support are important risk factors for hospitalization for self-harm.
          Our results are less certain with respect to the role that living arrangements, loneliness and
          emotional support might play in deaths by suicide for women. Given the large differences in rates of
          death by suicide between men and women (Scourfield and Evans, 2015) and systematic review
          findings that the relationship between marital status and suicide is moderated by gender (Kyung-
          Sook et al., 2018), a priori we decided to analyse the results separately by gender. The large gender
          difference in death by suicide rates indicates that either risk factors’ associations or their prevalence
          differ by gender. From our stratified analyses, we find much more modest associations (around half
          the strength of equivalent associations for men) between living arrangements and loneliness and
          death by suicide in unadjusted models for women, and these associations are largely explained by
          socioeconomic factors, health and mental health at baseline. The confidence intervals for the sample
          do not completely rule out the possibility of there being associations between death by suicide and
          living arrangements, loneliness and emotional support for women within the general population. To
          carry out improved analyses for women would require much larger samples, such as national-level
          UK census linked to hospital and mortality records. Even then, only some aspects of our analyses
                                                                        9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          could be replicated as these administrative data lack many important variables, particularly
          loneliness.
          Our findings on the relationship between death by suicide and living arrangements, loneliness and
          emotional support for men suggest that these are not simply distal risk factors: the associations
          persist after adjusting for measures of physical and mental health. With respect to death by suicide,
          the protective associations of living with a partner are particularly important. Cohabiting with a
          partner appears to be associated with protection against death by suicide even after adjusting for
          socioeconomic and demographic factors, physical health, mental health, loneliness and emotional
          support. This could be the case for a number of reasons but operationalizing loneliness or emotional
          support using single item measures is unlikely to be the explanation. The loneliness and emotional
          support measures we used were strongly associated with self-harm. An alternative methodological
          explanation is that men who die by suicide may be less willing to seek treatment for poor mental
          health and that the risk of suicide is greater among those who never see a GP, compared to those
          who see a GP once a year (Windfuhr et al., 2016), hence there may be residual confounding due to
          poor health. However, that would not in itself explain why men who are not living with a partner
          have increased risk of poor mental health, that in turn leads to death by suicide.
          There are also theoretical reasons that could explain why having a partner is protective against
          death by suicide. One possibility is that the benefits of having a partner may be linked to men’s
          sense of masculinity and self-image (Scourfield et al., 2012), rather than emotional support or
          companionship. Given that living with a non-partner does not appear to be associated with any
          protective effects, and the removal of the protective associations of having a partner among people
          who are lonely, some of the risk might be due to the concept of “perceived burdensomeness” from
          the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide (Van Orden et al., 2010). Components of perceived
          burdensomeness, which include self-hatred and feeling so flawed that one becomes a liability to
          others, could be theorized as being active drivers for death by suicide. Perceived burdensomeness
          could arise in situations in which living arrangements suggested a dysfunctional relationship (such as
          being lonely while cohabiting) or living in situations in which men are unable to fulfil traditional male
          roles that require having a partner (Scourfield and Evans, 2015). It is possible that perceived
          burdensomeness may not just be a driver of suicidal behaviour in general, but also a driver towards
          more lethal self-harm behaviours.
          For hospitalization for self-harm, in contrast to death by suicide, loneliness and emotional support
          appear to be the more important than living arrangements. Associations exist after adjusting for
          sociodemographic and mental and physical health factors, and for men loneliness and emotional
          wellbeing explain most of the relationship between living alone and hospitalization for self-harm.
          This is consistent with the idea that loneliness and lack of emotional support are mechanisms
          through which living alone, or at least without a partner, could increase risk of suicide. This is also
          consistent with the concept of ‘thwarted belongingness’ from the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide,
          which suggests that loneliness alongside the absence of reciprocal caring relationships can lead to
          self-destructive behaviours (Stanley et al., 2016; Van Orden et al., 2010). However, given that in the
          presence of loneliness any protective associations of cohabitation are removed for men, it also raise
          questions about the extent to which a lonely person can also feel that they do or do not have a
          reciprocal caring relationship.
          Our findings are consistent with some differences in the risks for different types of suicidal
          behaviour (DeJong et al., 2010; Klonsky et al., 2016). One possibility is that while thwarted
          belongingness and perceived burdensomeness both drive suicidal behaviour, the latter more
          strongly drives individuals towards more lethal methods. However, our results may also be
                                                                        10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          consistent with other theories for suicidality. An alternative is that loneliness could be considered a
          form of emotional dysregulation. Emotional dysregulation theory proposes that while emotional
          dysregulation is an important factor in self-harm, some aspects of emotional dysregulation may be
          protective against something that is as daunting and as fearful as lethal self-harm (Stanley et al.,
          2016). It should be noted that lack of emotional support was more strongly associated with self-
          harm than it was associated with death by suicide. Given that emotionally supportive relationships
          can improve emotional regulation (Overall and Simpson, 2013), this would also be consistent with
          emotional dysregulation theory.
          Strengths and limitations
          The key strength of this study is that UK Biobank had a baseline sample of more than 500,000
          people. This very large sample provided an opportunity to study death by suicide and hospitalization
          for self-harm, which are both rare outcomes. However, UK Biobank data do have some potential
          limitations. The recruitment of such a large sample is only justifiable if it collects data on a broad
          range of topics, many of which are necessarily operationalised using single item questions. The use
          of single item measures for loneliness, which was a simple dichotomous measure, and perceived
          emotional support might be considered a weakness of our study. They are items drawn from longer
          scales and have not been validated as single items. The extent of loneliness may be underreported
          as there are negative connotations to being lonely and people may not always admit that they feel
          lonely (de Jong Gierveld, 1998). However, single-item measures are considered appropriate (Stickley
          and Koyanagi, 2016) and have been recommended for the study of loneliness (HM Government,
          2018). Another limitation is that UK Biobank had an invitation response rate of only 5.5%, and,
          compared to the general population UK Biobank is less economically deprived with some evidence of
          a healthy volunteer selection bias (Fry et al., 2017). A heathy volunteer selection bias may explain
          why the yearly death by suicide rates for both men (8.9 deaths per 100,000 per year) for women (3.5
          deaths per 100,000 per year) in UK Biobank is lower than death rate for suicides in the UK (Office for
          National Statistics, 2019).
          Our study uses observational data with the inherent limitations for inferring causality. We have
          adjusted for a broad range of potential confounding variables at baseline and we had follow-up data
          on deaths by suicide and hospitalisation for self-harm. However, our baseline measures were only
          recorded at a single time point and potentially participants’ circumstances could have changed over
          time. In addition, with measurements recorded at only one time point, it is impossible to determine
          the causal direction between measures conclusively. It is likely that the relationship between the
          social connection measures and baseline health is bidirectional. However, given that the peak age of
          onset for major depressive disorder is early adulthood (Myrna M. Weissman et al., 2016), we
          decided to focus on a somewhat conservative approach, prioritising relationships presented in
          models that have adjusted for both mental health and sociodemographic measures. The mental
          health measures that are available for all UK Biobank participants at baseline were: self-report of
          ever seeing a GP for nerves, anxiety, and depression; and receipt of psychotropic medication. This
          may underestimate depression, which might confound the associations found in the study. In
          addition, the frequency of alcohol consumption measure will not fully capture substance abuse.
          There are other potential confounding measures for which data is unavailable in UK Biobank
          including personality disorders, conflict and stressful life events. We were also limited in our
          analyses by only having self-harm hospital admission data for England (these data were not available
          for Wales or Scotland). It is also the case that many who self-harm do not seek help from services or,
          when they do, are not admitted but are reviewed as out-patients (Gunnell et al., 2005).
                                                                        11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Finally, the target sample of this population was those aged 40 to 70 living in the United Kingdom,
          and the sample contained only a handful of people outside this age range. These results may not be
          generalizable to other age groups or to other cultures where attitudes to suicide, or other societal
          level risk factors for suicide, such as the availability of fire arms, may be very different.
          CONCLUSIONS
          This study raises several questions for future exploration. Our results suggest that addressing
          loneliness in the general population may reduce the risk of self-harm but, for death by suicide, there
          is a much more complex (and likely sex-specific) relationship between loneliness, living
          arrangements and perceived emotional support. Overall, this work demonstrates that for men (but
          not for women) living alone or with a non-partner is associated with increased risk of suicide, a
          finding not explained by perceived loneliness. It appears likely that loneliness may be more
          important as a risk factor for self-harm than for suicide. These findings may reflect differences in the
          theoretical pathways for death by suicide and self-harm.
                                                                        12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          AUTHOR STATEMENTS
          Contributors
          RJS, DJS, BC and AJ developed the research question. NG, JW, BC, RJS, AJ, DML, RP assisted with
          deriving and coding the variables. RJS carried out the analysis. BC, DML and DM provided advice on
          statistical methodology. AJ and CO carried out the literature review. RJS, DJS, AJ and CO drafted the
          manuscript. All authors edited and agreed the final manuscript.
          Funding sources
          This project was supported by two MRC Mental Health Data Pathfinder Awards [grant numbers
          MC_PC_17217, MC_PC_17211].
          Acknowledgements
          We thank all participants in the UK Biobank study. The project was completed using UK Biobank
          project code 6553 (PI: Smith). UK Biobank was established by the Wellcome Trust, Medical Research
          Council, Department of Health, Scottish Government and Northwest Regional Development Agency.
          UK Biobank has also had funding from the Welsh Assembly Government and the British Heart
          Foundation. Data collection was funded by UK Biobank.
                                                                        13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          REFERENCES
          Age UK, 2018. All the Lonely People: Loneliness in Later Life. Age UK, London. https://www.ageuk.or
          g.uk/globalassets/age-uk/documents/reports-and-publications/reports-and-
          briefings/loneliness/loneliness-report.pdf
          Amato, P.R., 2014. Marriage, cohabitation and mental health. Fam. Matters 96, 5-13.
          Bennardi, M., Caballero, F.F., Miret, M., Ayuso-Mateos, J.L., Haro, J.M., Lara, E., Arensman, E.,
          Cabello, M., 2019. Longitudinal Relationships Between Positive Affect, Loneliness, and Suicide
          Ideation: Age-Specific Factors in a General Population. Suicide Life. Threat. Behav. 49, 90-103.
          Beutel, M.E., Klein, E.M., Brähler, E., Reiner, I., Jünger, C., Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Wild, P.S., Münzel,
          T., Lackner, K.J., Tibubos, A.N., 2017. Loneliness in the general population: prevalence, determinants
          and relations to mental health. BMC Psychiatry 17, 97.
          Cacioppo, S., Capitanio, J.P., Cacioppo, J.T., 2014. Toward a neurology of loneliness. Psychol. Bull.
          140, 1464-1504.
          Cleves, M., Gould, W.W., Marchenko, Y.V., 2016. An Introduction to Survival Analysis Using Stata:
          Revised Third Edition. Stata Press, College Station, Texas.
          Conejero, I., Lopez-Castroman, J., Giner, L., Baca-Garcia, E., 2016. Sociodemographic Antecedent
          Validators of Suicidal Behavior: A Review of Recent Literature. Curr. Psychiat. Rep. 18, 94.
          Courtin, E., Knapp, M., 2017. Social isolation, loneliness and health in old age: a scoping review.
          Health Soc. Care Comm. 25, 799-812.
          de Jong Gierveld, J., 1998. A review of loneliness: concept and definitions, determinants and
          consequences. Rev Clin Gerontol 8, 73-80.
          DeJong, T.M., Overholser, J.C., Stockmeier, C.A., 2010. Apples to oranges?: A direct comparison
          between suicide attempters and suicide completers. J. Affect. Disord. 124, 90-97.
          Dreyer, K., Steventon, A., Fisher, R., Deeny, S.R., 2018. The association between living alone and
          health care utilisation in older adults: a retrospective cohort study of electronic health records from
          a London general practice. BMC Geriatr. 18, 269.
          Elovainio, M., Hakulinen, C., Pulkki-Råback, L., Virtanen, M., Josefsson, K., Jokela, M., Vahtera, J.,
          Kivimäki, M., 2017. Contribution of risk factors to excess mortality in isolated and lonely individuals:
          an analysis of data from the UK Biobank cohort study. Lancet Public Health 2, e260-e266.
          Frisch, M., Simonsen, J., 2013. Marriage, cohabitation and mortality in Denmark: national cohort
          study of 6.5 million persons followed for up to three decades (1982–2011). Int. J. Epidemiol. 42, 559-
          578.
          Fry, A., Littlejohns, T.J., Sudlow, C., Doherty, N., Adamska, L., Sprosen, T., Collins, R., Allen, N.E.,
          2017. Comparison of Sociodemographic and Health-Related Characteristics of UK Biobank
          Participants With Those of the General Population. Am. J. Epidemiol. 186, 1026-1034.
          Gunnell, D., Bennewith, O., Peters, T.J., House, A., Hawton, K., 2005. The epidemiology and
          management of self-harm amongst adults in England. J Public Health 27, 67-73.
          Hakulinen, C., Pulkki-Råback, L., Virtanen, M., Jokela, M., Kivimäki, M., Elovainio, M., 2018. Social
          isolation and loneliness as risk factors for myocardial infarction, stroke and mortality: UK Biobank
          cohort study of 479 054 men and women. Heart 104, 1536-1542.
          Hawkley, L.C., Cacioppo, J.T., 2010. Loneliness Matters: A Theoretical and Empirical Review of
          Consequences and Mechanisms. Ann. Behav. Med. 40, 218-227.
          HM Government, 2018. A connected society A strategy for tackling loneliness - laying the
          foundations for change. Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, London.
          https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-connected-society-a-strategy-for-tackling-
          loneliness (accessed 27 August 2020).
          Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T.B., Baker, M., Harris, T., Stephenson, D., 2015. Loneliness and Social
          Isolation as Risk Factors for Mortality:A Meta-Analytic Review. Perspect Psychol Sci 10, 227-237.
          Joutsenniemi, K., Martelin, T., Martikainen, P., Pirkola, S., Koskinen, S., 2006. Living arrangements
          and mental health in Finland. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 60, 468-475.
                                                                        14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Klonsky, E.D., May, A.M., Saffer, B.Y., 2016. Suicide, Suicide Attempts, and Suicidal Ideation. Annu.
          Rev. Clin. Psychol. 12, 307-330.
          Kyung-Sook, W., SangSoo, S., Sangjin, S., Young-Jeon, S., 2018. Marital status integration and suicide:
          A meta-analysis and meta-regression. Soc. Sci. Med. 197, 116-126.
          Langford, C.P.H., Bowsher, J., Maloney, J.P., Lillis, P.P., 1997. Social support: a conceptual analysis. J.
          Adv. Nurs. 25, 95-100.
          McCormack, A., Edmondson-Jones, M., Fortnum, H., Dawes, P., Middleton, H., Munro, K.J., Moore,
          D.R., 2014. The prevalence of tinnitus and the relationship with neuroticism in a middle-aged UK
          population. J. Psychosom. Res. 76, 56-60.
          Myrna M. Weissman, Priya Wickramaratne, Marc J. Gameroff, Virginia Warner, Daniel Pilowsky,
          Rajni Gathibandhe Kohad, Helena Verdeli, Jamie Skipper, Ardesheer Talati, 2016. Offspring of
          Depressed Parents: 30 Years Later. Am. J. Psychiatry 173, 1024-1032.
          National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2011. Self-harm: longer-term management. NICE
          clinical guidelines 133, London: National Institute for Clinical Excellence, 2011.
          Nicholl, B.I., Mackay, D., Cullen, B., Martin, D.J., Ul-Haq, Z., Mair, F.S., Evans, J., McIntosh, A.M.,
          Gallagher, J., Roberts, B., Deary, I.J., Pell, J.P., Smith, D.J., 2014. Chronic multisite pain in major
          depression and bipolar disorder: cross-sectional study of 149,611 participants in UK Biobank. BMC
          Psychiatry 14, 350.
          Nock, M.K., Borges, G., Bromet, E.J., Cha, C.B., Kessler, R.C., Lee, S., 2008. Suicide and Suicidal
          Behavior. Epidemiol. Rev. 30, 133-154.
          Office for National Statistics, 2019. Suicides in the UK: 2018 registrations. Registered deaths in the
          UK from suicide analysed by sex, age, area of usual residence of the deceased and suicide method. O
          ffice for National Statistics, Newport. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birt
          hsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/suicidesintheunitedkingdom/2018registrations/ (accessed
          27 August 2020).
          Overall, N.C., Simpson, J.A., 2013. Regulation processes in close relationships., In: Simpson, J.A.,
          Overall, N.C. (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of close relationships Oxford University Press, New York,
          NY, pp. 427-451.
          Perlman, D., Peplau, L.A., 1981. Toward a social psychology of loneliness. Pers Relationships 3, 31-56.
          Rico-Uribe, L.A., Caballero, F.F., Martín-María, N., Cabello, M., Ayuso-Mateos, J.L., Miret, M., 2018.
          Association of loneliness with all-cause mortality: A meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 13, e0190033.
          Royston, P., Lambert, P.C., 2011. Flexible Paramatric Survial Analysis Using Stata: Beyond the Cox
          Model Stata Press, College Station, Texas.
          Scourfield, J., Evans, R., 2015. Why Might Men Be More at Risk of Suicide After a Relationship
          Breakdown? Sociological Insights. Am. J. Mens Health 9, 380-384.
          Scourfield, J., Fincham, B., Langer, S., Shiner, M., 2012. Sociological autopsy: An integrated approach
          to the study of suicide in men. Soc. Sci. Med. 74, 466-473.
          Shensa, A., Sidani, J.E., Escobar-Viera, C.G., Switzer, G.E., Primack, B.A., Choukas-Bradley, S., 2020.
          Emotional support from social media and face-to-face relationships: Associations with depression
          risk among young adults. J. Affect. Disord. 260, 38-44.
          Sinclair, J.M.A., Harriss, L., Baldwin, D.S., King, E.A., 2005. Suicide in depressive disorders: A
          retrospective case-control study of 127 suicides. J. Affect. Disord. 87, 107-113.
          Smith, K.J., Victor, C., 2019. Typologies of loneliness, living alone and social isolation and their
          associations with physical and mental health Ageing Soc. 39, 1709-1730.
          Solmi, M., Veronese, N., Galvano, D., Favaro, A., Ostinelli, E.G., Noventa, V., Favaretto, E., Tudor, F.,
          Finessi, M., Shin, J.I., Smith, L., Koyanagi, A., Cester, A., Bolzetta, F., Cotroneo, A., Maggi, S.,
          Demurtas, J., De Leo, D., Trabucchi, M., 2020. Factors Associated With Loneliness: An Umbrella
          Review Of Observational Studies. J. Affect. Disord. 271, 131-138.
          Stanley, I.H., Hom, M.A., Rogers, M.L., Hagan, C.R., Joiner, T.E., 2016. Understanding suicide among
          older adults: a review of psychological and sociological theories of suicide. Aging Ment. Health 20,
          113-122.
                                                                        15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Stickley, A., Koyanagi, A., 2016. Loneliness, common mental disorders and suicidal behavior: Findings
          from a general population survey. J. Affect. Disord. 197, 81-87.
          Sudlow, C., Gallacher, J., Allen, N., Beral, V., Burton, P., Danesh, J., Downey, P., Elliott, P., Green, J.,
          Landray, M., Liu, B., Matthews, P., Ong, G., Pell, J., Silman, A., Young, A., Sprosen, T., Peakman, T.,
          Collins, R., 2015. UK Biobank: An Open Access Resource for Identifying the Causes of a Wide Range
          of Complex Diseases of Middle and Old Age. PLOS Med. 12, e1001779.
          Turecki, G., Brent, D.A., 2016. Suicide and suicidal behaviour. Lancet 387, 1227-1239.
          van Hedel, K., Martikainen, P., Moustgaard, H., Myrskylä, M., 2018. Cohabitation and mental health:
          Is psychotropic medication use more common in cohabitation than marriage? SSM Popul. Health 4,
          244-253.
          Van Orden, K.A., Witte, T.K., Cukrowicz, K.C., Braithwaite, S.R., Selby, E.A., Joiner Jr, T.E., 2010. The
          interpersonal theory of suicide. Psychol. Rev. 117, 575-600.
          Windfuhr, K., While, D., Kapur, N., Ashcroft, D.M., Kontopantelis, E., Carr, M.J., Shaw, J., Appleby, L.,
          Webb, R.T., 2016. Suicide risk linked with clinical consultation frequency, psychiatric diagnoses and
          psychotropic medication prescribing in a national study of primary-care patients. Psychol. Med. 46,
          3407-3417.
          Yao, T., Zheng, Q., Fan, X., 2015. The Impact of Online Social Support on Patients’ Quality of Life and
          the Moderating Role of Social Exclusion. J. Serv. Res. 18, 369-383.
                                                                        16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
          not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                           It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
            Table 1: Characteristics for Men and Women in UK Biobank
                                  Women                   Men                                                   Women               Men
                                 n       %              n        %                                             n       %          n       %
   Social Connection
   Living arrange’                                                              Centre Country
   Alone                      53,737    19.7        39,188      17.1                 England               243,756    89.2    205,057    89.5
   Cohabitation              188,588    69.0        174,503     76.2                   Wales                 9,701     3.6     8,177      3.6
   Non Partner                28,787    10.5        13,330       5.8                 Scotland              19,945      7.3     15,900     6.9
   Missing                    2,290      0.8         2,113       0.9
   loneliness                                                                         Health
   No                        210,917    77.2        190,330     83.1            Multimorbidity1
   Yes                        57,045    20.9        34,371      15.0                   Zero                 99,438    36.4     83,795    36.6
   Missing                    5,440      2.0         4,433       1.9                    One                 90,116    33.0     76,252    33.3
   Emotional Support                                                                   Two                  49,995    18.3     42,382    18.5
   Almost Daily              140,692    51.5        117,881     51.5              Three or more            33,853     12.4     26,705    11.7
   2-4 times a week           30,321    11.1        16,462       7.2                  missing                 na1                Na
   Once a Week                33,579    12.3        19,751       8.6             Ever Depressed
   Monthly                    30,276    11.1        22,965      10.0                    No                 159,662    58.4    168,388    73.5
   Never                      29,284    10.7        42,449      18.5                    Yes                110,878    40.6     58,590    25.6
   Missing                    9,250      3.4         9,626       4.2                 Missing                 2,862    1.1      2,156      0.9
                                                                               Psychotropic Meds
   Socio Demographic                                                                    No                 235,483    86.1    209,628    91.5
   Age                                                                                  Yes                 28,474    10.4     14,217     6.2
   35/44                      27,835    10.2        23,968      10.5                 Missing                 9,445    3.5      5,289      2.3
   45/54                      80,110    29.3        62,305      27.2              Alcohol usage
   55/64                     116,860    42.7         95,446     41.7           Daily / almost daily         43,867    16.0     57,907    25.3
   65/74                      48,597    17.8        47,415      20.7            3 to 4 times week           55,899    20.5     59,546    26.0
   Ethnicity                                                                    1 -2 times a week          105,686    38.7     79,469    34.7
   White British             240,265    87.9        202,345     88.3          Special event or never        57,137    20.9     23,263    10.2
   Other                      31,871    11.7         25,278     11.0                  Former                 9,983     3.7     8,125      3.6
   Missing                    1,266      0.5         1,511       0.7                 Missing                  830     0.3        824      0.4
   Employment status                                                                 Smoking
   Employed                  149,212    54.6        137,958     60.2                   Never               162,064    59.3    111,473    48.7
   Retired                    95,565    35.0         71,420     31.2                 Previous               85,458    31.3     87,612    38.2
   Other                      27,105     9.9        18,323       8.0                  Current               24,367     8.9     28,612    12.5
   Missing                    1,520      0.6         1,433       0.6                 Missing                 1,513    0.6      1,437      0.6
   Deprivation                                                                       Obesity
   Least deprived             54,571    20.0        46,093      20.1            Normal & Under             107,822    39.4     57,340    25.0
   4th Quintile               54,568    20.0        45,537      19.9               Overweight               99,859    36.5    112,249    49.0
   3rd Quintile               55,333    20.2        45,057      19.7                   Obese               64,262     23.5     57,899    25.3
   2nd Quintile               55,355    20.3        45,020      19.7                 Missing                 1,459    0.5      1,646      0.7
   Most deprived              53,248    19.5        47,131      20.6
   Missing                     327       0.1          296        0.1                Suicidality
   Education                                                                 Hospital admission for
   Degree                     84,541    30.9        76,635      33.4               Self-harm2
   Professional               40,982    15.0        31,452      13.7                 N Events                 589                471
   NVQ, HND or HNC            28,304    10.4        34,682      15.1        Median time to event (yrs)        2.37              2.61s
   A level                    15,758     5.8        11,477       5.0         N Censored due to death         3,966             6,173
   O level                    41,639    15.2        23,045      10.1        Median time to censor (yrs)       3.77              3.64
   CSE                        10,863     4.0         7,745       3.4           Person yrs follow up       1,458,045          1,220,987
   None                       45,968    16.8        39,307      17.2
   Missing                    5,347      2.0         4,791       2.1             Died by suicide
   Ever same sex                                                                     N Events                  85                181
   Relationship                                                             Median time to event (yrs)        5.00              4.54
   None                      235,296    86.1        197,726     86.3          N Censored due death           7,981             12,037
   At least one               6,923      2.5         8,894       3.9        Median time to censor (yrs)       5.64              5.54
   Missing                    31,184    11.4        22,514       9.8           Person yrs follow up       2,444,031          2,027,824
            1. Data are only available for those reporting conditions,
            2 Analyses only include those who attended a Biobank centre in England at baseline.
                                                                         17

                                                                                                                                                                                        medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
Table 2: Death by suicide hazard ratios for loneliness, living arrangements and perceived social support, in unadjusted and adjusted models for men and women in
the UK Biobank study
                                      Model 1                   Model 2                  Model 3                  Model 4                   Model 5                 Model 6
                                     HR 95% (CI)               HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)
                                                                   Men
Living arrangements
(Cohabitating)
Alone                            3.57 (2.61 to 4.87)***    2.72 (1.93 to 3.82)***   2.35 (1.66 to 3.32)***   2.16 (1.51 to 3.09)***   2.14 (1.50 to 3.09)***   2.02 (1.40 to 2.93)***
Non partner                      2.91 (1.80 to 4.73)***    2.11 (1.28 to 3.49)***   1.94 (1.17 to 3.20)**     1.80 (1.08 to 3.00)* 1.81 (1.09 to 3.01)*         1.72 (1.03 to 2.88)*
Loneliness (No)
Yes                              3.20 (2.35 to 4.36)***    2.45 (1.77 to 3.40)***   1.71 (1.22 to 2.41)**    1.43 (1.01 to 2.03)*                              1.39 (0.97 to 1.99)+
                                                                                                                                                                                                not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
Emotional support (daily)
2-4 times a week                  1.89 (1.11 to 3.21)*     1.69 (0.99 to 2.88)+      1.51 (0.88 to 2.57)                               1.29 (0.75 to 2.21)      1.25 (0.73 to 2.15)
Once a week                      2.50 (1.59 to 3.92)***    2.21 (1.40 to 3.49)**    2.00 (1.26 to 3.15)**                              1.62 (1.02 to 2.60)*    1.55 (0.97 to 2.49)+
Monthly                           1.60 (0.98 to 2.64)+      1.45 (0.88 to 2.40)      1.30 (0.78 to 2.14)                               1.08 (0.65 to 1.80)      1.02 (0.61 to 1.71)
Never                            1.86 (1.26 to 2.73)***    1.60 (1.08 to 2.36)*     1.51 (1.02 to 2.22)*                               1.25 (0.83 to 1.87)      1.17 (0.77 to 1.76)
                                                                 Women
Living arrangements
(Cohabitating)
Alone                             1.58 (0.96 to 2.61)+      1.51 (0.89 to 2.54)      1.21 (0.71 to 2.06)      1.24 (0.72 to 2.12)       1.23 (0.72 to 2.11)     1.25 (0.72 to 2.15)
Non partner                        1.45 (0.76 to 2.79)      1.24 (0.63 to 2.43)      1.01 (0.51 to 1.99)      1.03 (0.52 to 2.04)       1.02 (0.52 to 2.02)     1.03 (0.52 to 2.05)
Loneliness (No)
Yes                               1.49 (0.91 to 2.43)       1.42 (0.86 to 2.34)      0.92 (0.55 to 1.54)      0.89 (0.53 to 1.50)                               0.92 (0.54 to 1.57)
Emotional support (daily)
2-4 times a week                  1.33 (0.70 to 2..54)      1.25 (0.66 to 2.38)      1.08 (0.57 to 2.05)                                1.04 (0.54 to 2.00)     1.05 (0.55 to 2.02)
Once a week                       1.21 (0.64 to 2.29)       1.18 (0.62 to 2.24)      0.97 (0.51 to 1.84)                                0.93 (0.49 to 1.79)     0.95 (0.49 to 1.82)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Monthly                           0.78 (0.35 to 1.74)       0.78 (0.35 to 1.75)      0.66 (0.30 to 1.48)                                0.65 (0.29 to 1.45)     0.66 (0.29 to 1.49)
Never                             1.13 (0.57 to 2.25)       1.17 (0.58 to 2.34)      1.00 (0.50 to 2.02)                                0.98 (0.49 to 1.98)     1.00 (0.49 to 2.06)
*** p ≤ 0.001, ** p ≤0.01, * p ≤0.05, + p ≤0.1.
Model 1 univariable cox regression, model 2 adjusts for socio-demographic factors (sex, age, ethnicity, employment status, deprivation and highest qualification, ever had
same sex relationship), model 3 is model 2 plus adjusting for health measures (number physical morbidities, ever depressed, on psychotropic medication, BMI, alcohol
consumption, smoking). Model 4 is model 3 plus mutual adjustment for loneliness and living arrangements. Model 5 is model 3 plus mutual adjustment for living
arrangements and perceived social support. Model 6 is model 3 plus mutual adjustment for living arrangements, loneliness and perceived social support.
                                                                                      18

                                                                                                                                                                                        medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
Table 3: Admissions to hospital for self-harm hazard ratios for loneliness, living arrangements and perceived social support, in unadjusted and adjusted models
for men and women in the UK Biobank study
                                      Model 1                   Model 2                   Model 3                 Model 4                  Model 5                  Model 6
                                     HR 95% (CI)               HR 95% (CI)               HR 95% (CI)             HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)              HR 95% (CI)
                                                                   Men
Living arrangements
(Cohabitating)
Alone                            3.14 (2.57 to 3.84)***    1.67 (1.34 to 2.09)***   1.37 (1.09 to 1.72)**    1.17 (0.93 to 1.48)      1.17 (0.93 to 1.48)       1.06 (0.83 to 1.34)
Non partner                      3.56 (2.70 to 4.70)***    1.77 (1.32 to 2.38)***   1.64 (1.23 to 2.20)***   1.44 (1.07 to 1.94)*     1.44 (1.10 to 1.95)*     1.33 (0.98 to 1.79)+
Loneliness (No)
Yes                              5.32 (4.43 to 6.40)***    3.13 (2.57 to 3.82)***   2.01 (1.63 to 2.47)***   1.91 (1.55 to 2.37)***                            1.74 (1.40 to 2.16)***
                                                                                                                                                                                                not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
Per log day X Loneliness          0.97 (0.93 to 1.01)+      0.97 (0.93 to 1.01)+     0.97 (0.93 to 1.01)+     0.97 (0.93 to 1.01)+                              0.97 (0.93 to 1.01)+
Emotional support (daily)
2-4 times a week                 1.95 (1.37 to 2.77)***    1.68 (1.18 to 2.40)**     1.47 (1.03 to 2.10)*                              1.41 (0.99 to 2.02)+     1.34 (0.94 to 1.92)+
Once a week                      2.46 (1.82 to 3.32)***    2.01 (1.48 to 2.72)***   1.79 (1.32 to 2.42)***                            1.69 (1.24 to 2.32)***   1.56 (1.14 to 2.14)**
Monthly                          2.13 (1.58 to 2.88)***    1.84 (1.34 to 2.49)***   1.60 (1.18 to 2.17)**                             1.53 (1.13 to 2.09)**     1.39 (1.02 to 1.90)*
Never                            2.98 (2.38 to 3.74)***    2.16 (1.72 to 2.72)***   1.95 (1.54 to 2.46)***                            1.86 (1.46 to 2.36)***   1.65 (1.29 to 2.10)***
                                                                 Women
Living arrangements
(Cohabitating)
Alone                            1.75 (1.44 to 2.11)***    1.67 (1.37 to 2.04)***    1.18 (0.96 to 1.44)      1.04 (0.85 to 1.28)      1.15 (0.93 to 1.41)      1.04 (0.85 to 1.28)
Non partner                      2.00(1.60 to 2.50)***      1.21 (0.96 to 1.53)      0.94 (0.74 to 1.19)      0.85 (0.67 to 1.08)      0.92 (0.73 to 1.17)      0.85 (0.67 to 1.08)
Loneliness (No)
Yes                              4.35 (3.60 to 5.13)***    3.25 (2.74 to 3.85)***   1.92 (1.61 to 2.29)***   1.93 (1.61 to 2.31)***                            1.89 (1.57 to 2.28)***
Per log day X Loneliness         0.95 (0.93 to 0.98)***    0.95 (0.93 to 0.98)***   0.95 (0.93 to 0.98)***   0.95 (0.93 to 0.98)***                            0.95 (0.93 to 0.98)***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Emotional support (daily)
2-4 times a week                   1.21 (0.92 to 1.60)       1.18 (0.90 to 1.56)     0.99 (0.75 to 1.31)                               0.98 (0.74 to 1.30)      0.91 (0.69 to 1.21)
Once a week                      1.52 (1.19 to 1.94)***    1.50 (1.17 to 1.92)***    1.20 (0.94 to 1.54)                               1.18 (0.92 to 1.52)      1.05 (0.82 to 1.35)
Monthly                           1.26 (0.98 to 1.66)+      1.27 (0.97 to 1.67)+     1.03 (0.78 to 1.35)                               1.02 (0.78 to 1.34)      0.88 (0.67 to 1.16)
Never                            2.20 (1.76 to 2.76)***    1.94 (1.54 to 2.43)***   1.50 (1.19 to 1.89)***                            1.49 (1.18 to 1.88)***   1.24 (0.98 to 1.58)+
*** p ≤ 0.001, ** p ≤0.01, * p ≤0.05, + p ≤0.1.
Model 1 Univariable Royston Parmar parametric Hazard models, model 2 adjusts for socio-demographic factors (sex, age, ethnicity, employment status, deprivation and
highest qualification, ever had same sex relationship). Model 3 is model 2 plus adjusting for health measures (number physical morbidities, ever depressed, on psychotropic
medication, BMI, alcohol consumption, smoking). Model 4 is model 3 plus mutual adjustment for loneliness and living arrangements. Model 5 is model 3 plus mutual
adjustment for living arrangements and perceived social support. Model 6 is model 3 plus mutual adjustment for living arrangements, loneliness and perceived social support.
                                                                                    19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008458.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
        not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Figure 1: The interactions between living arrangements and loneliness in the prediction of deaths by
          suicide and hospital admissions for self-harm for men in the UK Biobank Study.
                                                                        20
