medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Remote home monitoring (virtual wards) during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic
          review
          Cecilia Vindrola-Padros (0000-0001-7859-1646), Kelly E Singh (0000-0002-4513-1026),
          Manbinder S Sidhu (0000-0001-5663-107X), Theo Georghiou (0000-0001-9532-876X),
          Chris Sherlaw-Johnson (0000-0002-4851-6060), Sonila Tomini (0000-0002-4241-2121),
          Matthew Inada-Kim (0000-0001-6026-2246), Karen Kirkham, Allison Streetly (0000-0002-
          7588-9276), Naomi J Fulop (0000-0001-5306-6140)
          Cecilia Vindrola-Padros, Senior Research Fellow, Department of Targeted Intervention,
          University College London (UCL), Charles Bell House, 43-45 Foley Street, London, W1W
          7TY, United Kingdom, c.vindrola@ucl.ac.uk.
          Kelly Elizabeth Singh, Evaluation Fellow, Health Services Management Centre, School of
          Social Policy, University of Birmingham, Park House, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
          Birmingham, B15 2RT, UK, k.e.singh@bham.ac.uk.
          Manbinder S Sidhu, Research Fellow, Health Services Management Centre, School of
          Social Policy, University of Birmingham, Park House, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
          Birmingham, B15 2RT, UK, m.s.sidhu@bham.ac.uk.
          Theo Georghiou, Senior Fellow, Nuffield Trust, 59 New Cavendish Street, London, W1G
          7LP, UK, theo.georghiou@nuffieldtrust.org.uk.
          Chris Sherlaw-Johnson, Senior Fellow, Nuffield Trust, 59 New Cavendish Street, London,
          W1G 7LP, UK, chris.sherlaw-johnson@nuffieldtrust.org.uk
          Sonila Tomini, Research Fellow, UCL Department of Applied Health Research, University
          College London, Gower Street London, WC1E 6BT, UK, s.tomini@ucl.ac.uk
          Matthew Inada-Kim, Consultant Acute Physician, Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation
          Trust, Clinical Director Patient Safety & Digital, Wessex Academic Health & Science
          Network
          National COVID Clinical Reference groups- Primary care, Secondary care, Care homes
          National Clinical Lead Deterioration & National Specialist Advisor Sepsis, NHS England and
          NHS Improvement, McGill ward, Royal Hampshire County Hospital, Romsey Road,
          Winchester SO21 1QW, UK, matthew.inada-kim@nhs.net.
          Karen Kirkham, General Practitioner NHS Dorset, Integrated Care System Clinical Lead,
          NHSE/I Senior Medical Advisor Primary Care Transformation, Dorset CCG, Vespasian
          House, Barrack Rd, Dorchester, Dorset DT1 7TG, UK, Karen.kirkham@dorsetccg.nhs.uk.
          Allison Streetly, Department of Population Health Sciences Faculty of Life Sciences &
          Medicine, King’s College London SE1 1UL, UK, Deputy National Lead Healthcare Public
          Health, Public Health England 133-155 Waterloo Rd, London SE1 8UG & Senior Lecturer in
          Public Health Kings College London, allison.streetly@phe.gov.uk
          Naomi J Fulop, Professor of Health Care Organisation and Management, UCL Department
          of Applied Health Research, University College London, Gower Street London WC1E 6BT,
          UK, n.fulop@ucl.ac.uk
                                                                                                                                        1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Corresponding author:
          Dr Cecilia Vindrola
          Senior Research Fellow
          Department of Targeted Intervention
          University College London (UCL)
          Charles Bell House
          43-45 Foley Street
          London
          W1W 7TY
          UK
          c.vindrola@ucl.ac.uk
          ABSTRACT
          Objectives: The aim of this review was to analyse the implementation and impact of remote
          home monitoring models (virtual wards) during COVID-19, identifying their main
          components, processes of implementation, target patient populations, impact on outcomes,
          costs and lessons learnt.
          Design: The review was designed as a rapid systematic review to capture an evolving
          evidence base. We used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
          Analysis (PRISMA) statement.
          Setting: The review included models led by primary and secondary care across seven
          countries.
          Participants: 17 examples of models were included in the review.
          Main outcome measures: Impact of remote home monitoring on virtual length of stay,
          escalation, emergency department attendance/reattendance, admission/readmission and
          mortality.
          Results: The aim of the models was to maintain patients safe in the right setting. Most
          models were led by secondary care and confirmation of COVID-19 was not required (in most
          cases). Monitoring was carried via online platforms, paper-based systems with telephone
          calls or (less frequently) through wearable sensors. Models based on phone calls were
          considered more inclusive. Patient/carer training was identified as a determining factor of
          success. We could not reach conclusions regarding patient safety and the identification of
          early deterioration due to lack of standardised reporting and missing data. Economic
          analysis was not reported beyond how the resources were used.
          Conclusions: Future research should focus on staff and patient experiences of care and
          inequalities in patients’ access to care. Attention needs to be paid to the cost-effectiveness
          of the models and their sustainability, evaluation of their impact on patient outcomes by
          using comparators and the use of risk-stratification tools.
          Protocol registration: The review protocol was published on PROSPERO (CRD:
          42020202888).
          Keywords: remote home monitoring, virtual wards, COVID-19, silent hypoxia, rapid
          systematic review
                                                                                                                                2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          INTRODUCTION
          COVID-19 has rapidly spread across the world, leading to high rates of mortality and
          unprecedented pressure on healthcare systems. Delays in the presentation of patients with
          COVID-19 has led to patients arriving as emergencies with very low oxygen saturations,
          often without accompanying breathlessness (‘silent hypoxia’)1. These delayed presentations
          of severe COVID-19 led to extended hospital admissions for patients, often requiring
          invasive treatment and potential admission to intensive care units (ICU) or death2. Remote
          home monitoring models (sometimes referred to as ‘virtual wards’) have been established to:
          1) avoid unnecessary hospital admissions (appropriate care at the appropriate place), and 2)
          escalate cases of deterioration at an earlier stage to avoid invasive ventilation and ICU
          admission3. Some of these models have integrated the use of pulse oximetry to monitor
          oxygen levels and identify and treat cases of ‘silent hypoxia’2.
          Remote home monitoring models have been implemented in the US, Australia, Canada, the
          Netherlands, Ireland, China and UK, with some variation in the frequency of patient
          monitoring, modality (a combination of telephone or video calls and use of applications or
          online portals), patient admission criteria, staffing models used for patient monitoring and
          level of clinical oversight, and use of pulse oximetry4-8.
          There is a paucity of published literature on the models of care developed to implement
          remote home monitoring across different healthcare contexts during the COVID-19
          pandemic, the experiences of staff implementing these models and patients receiving care,
          the use of data for monitoring progress, resources required, as well as the impact of these
          models on clinical, process and economic outcomes. The aim of this review was to address
          these gaps by analysing the remote home monitoring models implemented during COVID-
          19, their main components, processes of implementation, target patient populations and
          lessons learned. We sought to identify evaluations of these models and their outcomes.
          METHODS
          Design
          We followed the review method proposed by Tricco et al.9. The rapid review method follows
          a systematic review approach but proposes adaptations to some of the steps to reduce the
          amount of time required to carry out the review. We used a large multidisciplinary team to
          review abstracts and full texts, and extract data; in lieu of dual screening and selection, a
          percentage of excluded articles was reviewed by a second reviewer, and software was used
          for data extraction and synthesis9.
          We used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
          (PRISMA) statement10 to guide the reporting of the methods and findings. The review
          protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD: 42020202888, registered 6 August 2020).
          Research questions
          The review sought to answer the following questions:
                    1.    What are the aims and designs of remote home monitoring models?
                    2.    What are the main stages involved in remote home monitoring for COVID-19?
                    3.    What are the patient populations considered appropriate for remote monitoring?
                    4.    How is patient deterioration determined and flagged?
                    5.    What are the expected outcomes of implementing remote home monitoring?
                    6.    What is their impact on outcomes and costs?
                    7.    What are the benefits and limitations of implementing these models?
                                                                                                                                3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Search strategy
          We used a phased search approach9. We carried out a series of search phases where we
          gradually added search terms based on the keywords used in the literature we identified.
          Appendix 1 includes the strategies used for these waves, including the final search strategy.
          We searched for literature indexed in the following databases: MEDLINE, CINAHL PLUS,
          EMBASE, TRIP, medRxiv and Web of Science. Initial searches were carried out on 9 July
          2020 and updated on 21 August 2020 and 21 September 2020. Results were combined into
          Mendeley and duplicates were removed. The reference lists of included articles were
          manually screened to identify additional relevant publications.
          Study selection, inclusion and exclusion criteria
          One researcher (CVP) screened the articles in the title phase, and additional researchers
          (KS) cross-checked exclusions in the abstract and full-text phases (KS, MS). Disagreements
          were discussed until consensus was reached. The inclusion criteria used for study selection
          was: 1) focus on the monitoring of confirmed or suspected patients with COVID-19), 2) focus
          on pre-hospital monitoring, monitoring after Emergency Department (ED) presentation and
          step-down wards for early discharge, 3) focus on monitoring at home (excluding monitoring
          done while the patient is in healthcare facilities), and 4) published in English. Due to the
          rapidly expanding evidence-base on COVID-19, we included a wide range of publications
          (i.e. feature articles, descriptions of services) and did not limit the selection to evaluations of
          remote home monitoring.
          Data extraction and management
          The included articles were analysed using a data extraction form developed in REDCap
          (Research Electronic Data Capture) that extracted data on: the design and general
          characteristics of the model, patient populations, main reported process and clinical
          outcomes and its potential economic impact. The form was developed after the initial
          screening of full-text articles. It was then piloted independently by two researchers using a
          random sample of five articles (CV and KS). Disagreements were discussed until consensus
          was reached. The data extraction form was finalised based on the findings from the pilot.
          Data extraction was cross-checked by three researchers (TG, CSJ and ST).
          Data synthesis
          Data were exported from REDCap and the main article characteristics were synthesised.
          The information entered in free text boxes was exported from REDCap and analysed using
          framework analysis11. The initial categories for the framework were informed by our research
          questions but we were also sensitive to topics emerging from the data.
          Quality assessment
          Due to the descriptive nature of the articles and lack of data in relation to study design, we
          did not assess the quality of the studies.
          RESULTS
          The initial search yielded 902 articles (Figure 1). These were screened based on the title
          and abstract and type of article, resulting in 155 articles for full-text review. Full-text review of
          these articles led to 11 articles that met the inclusion criteria (reasons for exclusion can be
          found in Figure 1). Three additional articles were identified by reviewing the bibliography and
          two articles were identified in an updated search carried out on 21 September 2020,
          ultimately leading to 16 articles (including 17 examples of remote home monitoring) included
          in the review. We excluded articles that focused on monitoring that took place within hospital
          settings (i.e. ICU) or for other non-COVID-19 related conditions.
                                                                                                                                4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE
          Characteristics of the included remote home monitoring models
          Eight of the remote home monitoring models were implemented in the US, three in the UK,
          two in Canada, and one each in The Netherlands, China, Ireland and Australia. Seven of the
          articles described the service, two were identified as evaluations, five as observational
          studies, one as a feasibility study and one (containing the example of two models) was a
          news feature (with a limited description of the services). Twelve of the examples were
          published in peer-reviewed journals and five were published in the form of preprints. The
          main characteristics of the included remote home monitoring examples are summarised in
          Table 1.
          INSERT TABLE 1 HERE
          Aims and main designs of remote home monitoring models
          The primary aim of the remote home monitoring models was to enable the early
          identification of deterioration for patients self-managing COVID-19 symptoms at home
          (including those who had not been admitted to hospital as well as those who had been
          discharged). The programme theory guiding these models was that if patients were able to
          take the required regular observations whilst remaining at home and communicate these to
          the healthcare professionals responsible for their care, then cases of deterioration could be
          identified early and acted upon. These actions could include changing their treatment
          protocol, referring them to primary care or to the emergency department for assessment and
          potential admission to hospital. A secondary aim of the models was their use to reduce the
          rate of hospital infection and demand for beds in the acute care sector, where admission to
          hospital could be prevented for patients considered suitable to be managed at home and
          those who had been admitted to hospital could be discharged earlier but continue under the
          remote care of a medical team (a team that varied in composition depending on the model).
          Most of the remote home monitoring models included in the review (15 examples out of 17)
          were led by teams in secondary care. Two examples were primary care led. Nine of the
          models functioned as pre-admission wards, in the sense that they sought to prevent the
          admission of patients to hospital or to identify cases of deterioration early (so those who
          should be referred could be admitted to hospital with lower rates of acuity). Three of the
          models functioned as “step-down” wards, that is, they were designed for patients who had
          been admitted to hospital (including ICU) where the medical team had identified that they
          could be discharged and safely monitored at home until their symptoms improved. Five
          models functioned as pre-admission and step-down wards, organised according to two
          separate pathways.
          Patient populations considered appropriate for remote monitoring
          Most of the models had broad criteria for the eligible patient population, defining the patient
          group as adult (over 18 yrs.) patients with COVID-19 symptoms (suspected and confirmed
          cases). Five of the models limited referrals to COVID-19 cases confirmed through testing6 12-
          15
            . The model described by Hutchings et al.6 excluded patients over 65 years with significant
          comorbidities. Shah et al.16 excluded pregnant women and only included patients with SpO2
          above 92% at initial assessment. We did not find any examples targeting socially and
          economically disadvantaged groups (although some models included support from social
          workers and mental health professionals)4 17. It is important to highlight that the size of the
          patient cohorts varied considerably (see Table 2 for patient numbers) and ranged from 18
          patients to 6853. The models with the highest numbers of patients were implemented in the
          US. The comorbidities mentioned with greater frequency were hypertension, asthma and
          obesity.
                                                                                                                                5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Table 2. Main characteristics of monitored patients
                                       Number                             Most common
                                       patients             Mean age       comorbidities
                                                      Inconsistencies             Asthma,
                                                        in reporting in     hypertension,
                                                     the article (48.6,  dyslipidemia and
          Agarwal                              97      43.6 and 43.8)              anxiety
          Annis                             2255           median 38*                   NS
          Grutters                             33                   57                  NS
          Margolius                         4213                    42          NS
                                                                            hypertension,
                                                                                 malignant
          Lam                                  50           median 44              disease
          Medina                              878                   NS                  NS
                                                                            hypertension,
                                                                          obesity, asthma
          O'Keefe                             496                 47.6            diabetes
                                                                               obesity and
          Shah                                 77           median 44        hypertension
          Xu                                   48         median 37.5                   NS
          Hutchings                           162           median 38                   NS
          Kricke                            6835                   47**                 NS
          Ford                                154                   NS                  NS
          Maghrabi                            300                   57      Hypertension
          Thornton1
          (Watford)                         1042                    NS                  NS
          Thornton2
          (Reading)                           244                   NS                  NS
          Morgan                            2348                 40-49                  NS
          O’Carroll                            18           median 48                   NS
          *For the subset of 1496 patients who completed the programme; ** for a subset of 6,006 who
          completed a survey
          NS=not specified
          Stages of remote home monitoring
          The articles described five main stages in remote home monitoring for COVID-19: 1) referral
          and triage to determine eligibility, 2) onboarding of patient to remote home monitoring
          service (provision of information to patient and/or carer on monitoring process, mechanisms
          for escalation and self-care), 3) monitoring (including recording of observations,
          communication of the information, assessment of the information by the medical team), 4)
          escalation (if required), and 5) discharge from the pathway.
          Patient information recorded at triage included:
                    •     Patient demographics (age, sex, race/ethnicity, insurance type in the models in
                          the US)
                    •     Clinical variables (clinical signs and symptoms, medical history and medications)
                    •     Health data for risk assessment and vital signs data (body temperature, heart
                          rate, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation)
          Three studies included some degree of detail in relation to the categorisation of patients in
          relation to risk14 17 18. The article by O’Keefe and colleagues12 described and evaluated a risk
          assessment model based on age, medical history and symptom severity. This model was
          able to identify the need for hospitalisation in initially non-severe COVID-19 patients.
                                                                                                                                6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          In six of the examples included in the review, monitoring was based on patient record of
          observations using a paper-based system and then communicating the information to a
          member of the medical team by telephone (see Table 1). Nine of the examples relied on the
          use of an online mechanism, either through an app or online form. One example offered
          patients a telephone or an app option19. Another example relied on the use of wearable
          sensors to continuously monitor temperature readings and transfer these to the medical
          team6. Ten of the models relied on the use of pulse oximetry from the beginning of
          implementation, four models did not use pulse oximetry, one model added pulse oximetry
          three weeks after implementation and two articles indicated that the use of pulse oximetry
          was being considered in the near future.
          Escalation was actioned depending on pre-established thresholds. Not all articles have
          reported the thresholds for escalation and most only refer to the worsening of symptoms.
          Shah et al.16 indicated that patients on their remote home monitoring pathway were flagged
          as deteriorating if reporting SpO2 below 92% after a double reading. Xu et al.20 used a SpO2
          reading of below 93% or BP less than 90/60 mmHg. Some of the examples included in the
          review established safety-netting options in cases when patients could not be reached via
          phone such as calling the police so they could visit the patient at home6.
          Most patients were followed-up until their symptoms improved or the patient opted out of the
          pathway. Medina et al.13 reported following up patients on the step-down pathway for 7 days
          post-discharge from hospital and those on the pre-admission pathway for 14 days. Shah et
          al.16 followed-up patients on their pre-admission pathway for 7 days. Hutchings et al.6
          referred patients to their GP for follow-up after discharging them from the remote home
          monitoring pathway.
          Expected outcomes of implementing remote home monitoring
          The outcomes recorded in each remote home monitoring model are listed in Table 1. They
          can be grouped in three main categories: 1) process outcomes related to the remote home
          monitoring pathway, 2) process outcomes related to secondary care and 3) patient
          outcomes (including clinical and experience). Process outcomes related to the remote home
          monitoring pathway included: time from swab to assessment, time to escalation and
          ambulance attendance/emergency activation (i.e. calling 999 or 911). Process outcomes
          related to secondary care included length of stay. Outcomes considered at the patient level
          included: emergency department attendance/reattendance, hospital admission, ICU
          admission, readmission, mortality, ventilation or non-invasive ventilation needs, and patient
          satisfaction.
          Impact on outcomes
          It was difficult to carry out an analysis of the impact of remote home monitoring across all
          examples because not all articles reported data on the same outcomes (Table 3). Mortality
          rates were low, admission or readmission rates ranged from 0 to 29%, and ED attendance
          or reattendance ranged from 4 to 36%. Four of the models reported data on patient
          feedback, with high satisfaction rates5 8 18 21.
          Remote home monitoring process outcomes were only included in six of the articles, with
          time from swab to assessment ranging from 2 to 3.7 days12 17 19 and virtual length of stay
          from 3.5 days to 13 days (see Table 3). Only one article presented findings on reduction in
          length of stay, calculated at 5 days fewer per patient21.
          Table 3. Impact of remote home monitoring on selected outcomes
                                                                      ED attendance/                Admission/
                                  virtual LoS       Escalation          reattendance               readmission         Mortality
          Agarwal            8 days (median)              5.10%                  4.2%                        0                NS
                                                                                                                                7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                           It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Annis                              NS                NS                 4.0%                     0.6%               NS
                                                      18 patients
                                                     reassessed
          Grutters*          13 days (mean)            in hospital                  NS                      9%**                0
          Margolius*                         NS                NS                   7%                        1%              NS
                              12.5 days (only
                                    for 52% of
          Lam                         patients)               12%                   NS                        8%                0
                                                                                                                   9 patients but
                                                                                                                  denominator is
          Medina                             NS               10%                   NS                 2%, 3%**           unclear
          O'Keefe                    13.1 days                 NS                   NS                     7.1%               NS
          Shah                               NS               25%                  36%                      29%             2.6%
          Xu                                 NS                NS                   NS                        NS                0
                              8 days (only for
                           62 of the patients
          Hutchings            in the sample)           5 patients                2.5%                     1.9%                 0
          Kricke                             NS                NS                 7.7%                        NS              NS
                                                            14.3%
                                                       referred to
                                                        physician
                                                           review;
                                                             3.9%
                                                     physician to
                                                      patient call;
                                                      2.6% to ED
          Ford                               NS     and admitted                  2.6%                     2.6%               NS
                                      3.5 days
          Maghrabi                    (median)                 NS                  13%                      9%**           0.66%
          Thornton1
          (Watford)                          NS                NS                   NS                        NS              NS
          Thornton2
          (Reading)                          NS                NS               11.9%                      7.4%                 0
                                                            16.9%
                                     12.7 days       escalated to
          Morgan                        (mean)      nurse review                  7.9%                     3.4%               NS
                                       12 days
          O’Carroll                   (median)                 NS                   NS                 4 patients             NS
          *included data for patients on remote home monitoring pathway, **refers to readmission in cases of step-down
          wards, LoS=length of stay, ED= emergency department, NS= not specified.
          The economic impact
          None of the selected studies for this rapid review provided any form of economic analysis,
          though some of them mentioned the potential for cost savings based on the utilisation of
          virtual monitoring programs for other treatments in similar settings14 21. Some of the selected
          studies highlighted the fact that, during the pandemic, the intervention used existing
          resources and staff that were made available due to the emergency situation7 12 14 22.
          However, they also highlighted that, with the return to normal workloads in the health care
          system, a question of allocation of resources and sufficient staffing still remains.
          DISCUSSION
          In this article we have sought to make a contribution to the rapidly growing evidence-base on
          the use of remote home monitoring models for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-
          19 (see box 1 for key lessons). The review has pointed to factors that need to be taken into
          consideration in relation to the design of these models. Most of the models included in the
          study were led by secondary care but some authors argued that coordination between
          primary and secondary care could facilitate the implementation of remote home monitoring
          pathways5 7 13. Primary care led models might be more adaptable to evolving patient and
          system needs and easier to replicate in contexts with limited secondary care access and
                                                                                                                                8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          capacity17. Three models integrated mental health and social care support during and after
          patient monitoring, highlighting a wide range of patient needs6 13 17.
          Box 1. Key lessons in the implementation of remote home monitoring models during the
          COVID-19 pandemic
               • It is important to consider remote home monitoring models as an approach to
                    maintain patients safe in the right setting.
               • The use of apps for monitoring allowed the follow-up of a higher number of patients
                    (compared to paper-based models), but some of the studies indicated that models
                    based on telephone calls were more inclusive (i.e. including patients without internet
                    access or technological literacy).
               • Patient/carer training was identified as a key determining factor of the success of
                    these models.
               • Coordination between primary and secondary care facilitated implementation
               • Primary care led models were considered, in some cases, as more adaptable to
                    evolving patient and system needs, and easier to replicate in contexts with limited
                    secondary care access and capacity.
               • A few models have integrated mental health and social care support during and after
                    patient monitoring, highlighting a wide range of patient needs.
          Even though several of the examples used apps and other types of online platforms,
          discussions in relation to the use of health technology were limited. The use of apps for
          monitoring allowed the follow-up of a higher number of patients (compared to paper-based
          models) but some of the studies indicated that models based on telephone calls were more
          inclusive (i.e. including patients without internet access or technological literacy)19. Patient
          experience was captured in some of the examples we reviewed8 21 but the analysis of patient
          experience was limited. An analysis of patient experience and engagement is important as
          the literature on the use of remote patient monitoring for other conditions has demonstrated
          that higher levels of patient engagement with remote patient monitoring technology are
          associated with better patient outcomes23.
          Similarly to other reviews on remote patient monitoring in other conditions, another limitation
          was the lack of attention placed on the implementation of the models and the failure to
          identify the programme theories guiding their design, factors that acted as barriers and
          facilitators and the extent to which the pathways were implemented according to their
          original plans24. This could be due to the limited evidence on COVID-19 and the
          management of patients with this disease at the time of designing and implementing these
          models as well as the general limited use of programme theories in the design of healthcare
          interventions that has already been documented in the literature25.
          Emerging international evidence has indicated that lower thresholds for oxygen saturation,
          are associated with worse patient outcomes2 26. In the case of our review, even though some
          authors argued that pulse oximetry identified the need for hospitalisation when using a cut-
          off of 92%16, we could not reach conclusions in relation to patient safety and the degree to
          which remote home monitoring models can conclusively identify cases of deterioration at an
          earlier stage in the disease trajectory. The main reasons were lack of standardised reporting
          across articles in relation to these outcome measures and how these were measured, as
          well as the limitation that none of the articles used comparators.
          Issues with using pulse oximetry were also highlighted such as: patient physiological
          measures needed to be recorded several times a day to correctly identify cases of
          deterioration, some remote home monitoring examples used standardised home pulse
          oximeters to avoid variability between different brands, pulse oximetry readings were made
          less accurate by nail polish, severe anaemia, hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobinopathies, or
                                                                                                                                9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          poor peripheral perfusion from severe vasoconstriction or poor cardiac output16 27. Some
          authors also argued that patient training was a key determining factor of the success of
          health information technology as it ensured readings and other observations were carried
          out accurately6. Remote home monitoring needed to be seen as an approach to maintain
          patients safely in the right setting rather than as an admission avoidance model.
          Remote home monitoring for COVID-19 patients was expected to have a positive economic
          impact, mainly due to costs savings in staff time and PPE utilisation, avoidance of infection
          of frontline medical staff and reduced hospitalisations14 21. However, the economic evidence
          in relation to these was limited. None of the selected studies included any form of economic
          analysis. The selected studies have, however, raised the issue of resource allocation and
          funding, especially when it comes to the continuity of such programs after the first
          emergency situation. Most of the staff who worked on remote monitoring interventions for
          COVID-19 came from other services and the resources used were already existing. Yet, with
          the return to normal workloads, providing sufficient staff and enough resources may become
          a problem. Previous studies have indicated that remote monitoring in itself has contributed to
          increased efficiency in the use of resources (such as reduction in length of stay, increasing
          bed availability without compromising patient care safety, etc.)15 21. A complete economic
          analysis in this context could indicate if remote home monitoring for COVID-19 patients is a
          cost-effective intervention and could help inform accurate planning of the needed resources
          and staff. This economic analysis would also need to include costs and benefits beyond the
          actual remote home monitoring models, a reliable control group, as well as a longer follow
          up period.
          This review has a series of limitations. The last search was carried on 21 September 2020,
          so any articles published after this date were not included. We have included preprints as a
          way to address delays produced by external review and publication. Furthermore, although
          we employed multiple broad search terms, it is possible that we missed articles that did not
          use these terms. Due to the variability in study designs and the descriptive nature of the
          articles we did not assess these for quality using standardised tools for assessment.
          However, we feel it is important to note that we found several cases of missing data and
          inconsistencies in the reporting of evaluations that would lead to low quality ratings.
          The review pointed to several future areas of research. These could include an analysis of
          patient experience, beyond measures of satisfaction and the exploration of potential
          inequalities in patients’ access to remote home monitoring models or patients’ difficulties
          interacting with technology. Technological barriers have been reported in other studies of
          remote home monitoring and should not be overlooked when exploring the experiences of
          patients with COVID-1928 29. Additional attention needs to be paid to the processes used to
          implement these models and how these might vary based on the healthcare sector, patient
          population, size, wave of the pandemic and approaches used for triage, monitoring and
          escalation. As mentioned earlier, primary care might need to play a more central role in the
          coordination of remote patient monitoring models, providing more holistic care for patients
          and reducing the demand on hospital services30. The evaluation of remote home
          monitoring, considering its impact on patient outcomes through the use of comparators is
          also required. We also need to consider the sustainability of these models during multiple
          epidemiological peaks, compare different approaches to remote home monitoring and
          assess their cost-effectiveness.
                                                                                                                              10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
             Table 1. Characteristics of the included remote home monitoring examples
                           Type of          Type
                           study and        of                     Sec   Patient                                                                TPatient reporting      Patient
    Author       Country   article          model   Terms          tor   population      Triage process            Recorded patient info        tool                    monitoring tool      Outcomes
                                                                                                                   Data for risk
                                                                                                                   assessment:
                                                                                                                   age, sex,
                                                                                                                   race/ethnicity,
                                                                                                                   insurance type,
                                                                                                                   smoking status
                                                                                                                   and clinical variables                                                    (1) emergency room visit
                                                                                                                   directly relevant to                                                      likely related to COVID-19
                                                                                                                   understanding the                                                         subsequent to hotline
                                                                                                                   social epidemiology of                                                    telehealth visit, (2)
                                                                                                                   the COVID-19 hotline                                                      hospitalization due to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                                                   (symptom protocols,                                                       COVID-19 subsequent to
                                                                                                                   visit disposition, visit                                                  hotline telehealth visit, (3)
                                                                                                                   diagnoses).                                                               SARSCoV-
                                                                                                                                                                                             2 PCR test ordered
                                                                                                                   Data for monitoring:                                                      subsequent to telehealth
                                                                                         Patient referred to       change in symptoms                                                        visit, and (4) positive
                                            Pre-                                         teleconsultation and      (including                                                                SARS-CoV-2 PCR test
                             Evaluation/    admis   Telehealth           C19             follow-up call made       temperature), basic                                                       subsequent to telehealth
1   Margolius    USA            Preprint    sion    services       PC    symptoms        24 hours after            living needs                 Paper-based             Telephone call       visit.
                                                                                                                                                                        Patients referred
                                                                                                                                                                        through an
                                                                                                                                                                        electronic form on
                                                                                         Patients where there                                                           the EHR,
                                                                                         were concerns about                                                            monitoring data
                                                                         Discharged      oxygenation were          Data for monitoring:                                 were inputted        LoS on virtual ward and in
                                                                         patients with   discharged with a         symptom improvement,         Patients received       directly on the      hospital, O2 requirements,
                           Description of   Step-                        suspected or    pulse oximeter and        stability or deterioration   daily phone calls and   EHR and auto-        readmission,
                            the service/    down                         confirmed       onboarded on to the       (including oxygen            asked standardised      populated a          reattendance, mortality
2   Maghrabi*    UK             Preprint    ward    Virtual ward   SC    COVID-19        virtual ward.             saturation)                  questions.              dashboard.           and patient satisfaction.
                                                                                                                   Data for risk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                         Patients        Patient assessed in       assessment:
                                                                         presenting at   ED and triaged to         patient-reported data
                                                                         ED with         virtual ward with pulse   (clinical signs and
                                                                         symptoms        oximeter. Patients        symptoms, medical
                                                                         and admitted    where there were          history and
                                            pre-                         patients who    concerns about            medications)
                           Description of   admis                        needed          oxygenation were
                           the service in   sion                         additional      discharged with a         Data for monitoring:         Online: App
                           news feature/    and                          monitoring at   pulse oximeter and        symptoms,                    (Medopad) + phone                            ED reattendance,
    Thornton1                 Published     step-                        the point of    onboarded on to the       temperature, and their       calls (phase 1 of the                        admission/readmission,
3   (Watford)*   UK               article   down    Virtual ward   SC    discharge       virtual ward.             oxygen level.                service)                Medopad app          mortality
    Thornton2              Description of   pre-                         Patients        Patient assessed in       Data for risk                Paper-based (patient    Phone call with      ED reattendance,
4   (Reading)*   UK        the service in   admis   Virtual ward   SC    presenting at   ED and triaged to         assessment:                  recorded information    medical team.        admission/readmission,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                            news feature/    sion                        ED with           virtual ward with         patient-reported data       at home and reported     Patients asked to    mortality, patient
                               Published     and                         symptoms or       oximeter. Patients        (clinical signs and         it to the medical team   do stress test and   satisfaction
                                   article   step-                       referred from     where there were          symptoms, medical           over the phone)          report O2 sats
                                             down                        primary care.     concerns about            history and                                          level
                                                                         Also included     oxygenation were          medications)
                                                                         admitted          discharged with a
                                                                         patients who      pulse oximeter and        Data for monitoring:
                                                                         needed            onboarded on to the       symptoms,
                                                                         additional        virtual ward.             temperature, oxygen
                                                                         monitoring at                               saturation level.
                                                                         the point of
                                                                         discharge.
                                                                                                                                                                          Wearable
                                                                                                                                                                          temperature
                                                                                                                                                                          monitor provides
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                                                                                                          continuous
                                                                                                                                                                          temperature
                                                                                                                     Data for risk                                        monitoring, which
                                                                                                                     assessment:                                          feed into a
                                                                                                                     patient-reported data                                dashboard.
                                                                                           Patients attend           (clinical signs and         Online: Wearable         Patients
                                                                                           COVID-19 testing          symptoms, medical           temperature monitor      monitored three
                                                                                           clinic, those in whom     history and                 provides continuous      times a day,
                                                                                           the virus is detected     medications)                temperature              including a
                                                                                           are referred to the                                   monitoring, which        videoconference
                                                                                           virtual care centre by    Data for monitoring:        feed into a              twice every 24
                                                                                           the local public health   vital signs - respiratory   dashboard.               hours. Video
                                                                         Patients in       unit. The care centre     rate, oxygen saturation,    Pulse oximeter           consultations
                                                                         whom C19 is       conducts an initial       pulse rate and              readings read directly   comprised most
                                                     Virtual             detected          assessment to             temperature,                from the device.         contacts with
                                                     health care,        (certain          ascertain suitability     assessment of other         Video consultations      telephone
                            Observational    Pre-    remote              inclusion and     for virtual health care   symptoms and signs of       used to confirm vital    consultations        Ambulance attendance,
    Hutchings                      study/    admis   patient             exclusion         – this is done by         deterioration assessed      signs collected by       making up the        ED attendance, ED
5   *           Australia        Preprint    sion    monitoring     SC   criteria apply)   telephone                 by video call               wearable devices.        remainder.           admission, mortality
                                                                         Patients                                    Data for risk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                         added to the                                assessment:                                          They monitor and
                                                                         registry were                               Evaluation of 10            Online: Enrolled         stratify responses
                                                                         those with                                  symptoms – used a           patients with an         to daily
                                                                         pending/indet                               short questionnaire that    electronic health        questionnaires,
                                                                         erminate/posi                               captured the main           record portal account    those with
                                                                         tive COVID-                                 domains of patients’        receive a                concerning
                                                     Home                19 test or        States only nurses        symptoms and                questionnaire            symptoms are
                                                     monitoring,         presumed          from COVID-19 triage      experiences.                invitation where they    called. Calls used
                                                     outpatient          presence          phone line, ED staff,     (symptoms - cough,          evaluate symptoms,       to evaluate          ED referrals (also
                            Description of           monitoring,         based on          and hospital medicine     shortness of breath,        those not enrolled in    symptoms,            anecdotal data about
                                 service/    Pre-    community           clinical          staff were able to add    sore throat, muscle         the patient portal (or   provide              being provided education,
                               Published     admis   based               criteria. Later   patients to the           aches, trouble              who do not respond)      information and      comfort and getting 911
6   Kricke      USA                article   sion    virtual care   SC   began only        registry.                 sleeping, lack of           are called.              answer questions.    activation help).
                                                                                                                                                                                                          12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                 including                                 energy, feeling ill,
                                                                 those with                                fever, diarrhoea,
                                                                 positive                                  stomach pain), patients
                                                                 COVID-19                                  were also asked how
                                                                 test.                                     many
                                                                                                           analgesic/antipyretic
                                                                                                           tablets they are taking,
                                                                                                           symptoms of others in
                                                                                                           the household, and for
                                                                                                           a measured
                                                                                                           temperature.
                                                                                                           Data for monitoring:
                                                                                                           symptoms and
                                                                                                           temperature.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                 Patients that were
                                                                                 enrolled were either
                                                                                 screened for COVID-
                                                                                 19through virtual care
                                                                                 platforms (phone,
                                                                                 video, online) or at an                              Online: GetWell Loop
                                                                                 ED or urgent care                                    - daily check in
                                                                                 visit and referred.                                  questions for patients
                                                                                 Providers were                                       to assess their           GetWell Loop -
                                                                                 informed about the        Data for risk              symptoms, patients        symptom
                                                                                 programme as a care       assessment:                could also send           monitoring
                                                                                 option. Had a referral    patient-reported data      comments and              questions were
                                                                                 order within electronic   (clinical signs and        questions through         monitored -
                                                                                 health records to         symptoms, medical          scrolling newsfeed.       concerning
                                                                                 gather the patients’      history and                Patients could also       answers routed to
                                                                                 required information      medications).              call the Mhealth triage   dashboard for
                                                                                 and they developed a                                 line for alerts or        action by member
                                                                                 batch process to          Data for monitoring:       comments outside          of first responder
                                                                                 automate enrolment.       Daily check in             8am-5pm (before they      team. Physicians
                                                                                 Then patients             questions to               expanded the              would also text or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                                 received an email         monitor/assess             workforce to include      call patients if an
                                              Remote             Patients with   with information on       symptoms, later            24/7 virtual care so      alert or comment
                       Evaluation/    Pre-    patient            confirmed or    how to activate and       updated to include         alerts could be           was                   Hospital admissions, ED
                        Published     admis   monitoring,        suspected       begin the programme       question that assessed     responded to out of       concerning/compli     visits. Patient satisfaction
7   Annis***   USA          article   sion    telehealth    SC   COVID-19        (optional).               pulse oximetry data.       hours).                   cated.                data also collected.
                                              Telemedici                         Patients with positive    Data for risk                                        Telephone -
                                              ne visits,                         COVID-19 PCR test         assessment:                                          patients received
                                              virtual                            from screening clinics    patient-reported data                                regular calls,
                     Observational            outpatient                         or ED were referred       (clinical signs and                                  different levels of
                              study           manageme           Patients with   for enrolment in the      symptoms, medical                                    observation e.g.
                     (retrospective   Pre-    nt,                positive        Virtual Outpatient        history and                                          frequency of calls
                     cohort study)/   admis   telephone          COVID-19        Management Clinic.        medications).               Patients received        and duration,         Hospitalisation (metric:
8   O'Keefe    USA         Preprint   sion    monitoring    SC   PCR test        For those enrolling in                               regular calls             based on              days to hospitalisation).
                                                                                                                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                                       the virtual clinic, risk   Data for monitoring:                              assigned risk tier.
                                                                                       assessment data            Reported symptom
                                                                                       were obtained during       data (including
                                                                                       a scheduled                temperature).
                                                                                       telemedicine
                                                                                       appointment.
                                                                                       Used dedicated
                                                                                       registry of COVID-19       Data for risk
                                                                                       patients - populated       assessment:
                                                                                       using the positive         patient-reported data
                                                                                       diagnostic test as the     (clinical signs and
                                                                                       trigger (as well as        symptoms, medical
                                                                                       with all patients using    history and
                                                                                       virtual urgent care for    medications)
                                                                                       COVID-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                       suspicions). All           Data for monitoring:
                                                                                       testing submitted          Patient reported
                                                                                       through the site was       outcomes (PRO)
                                                                                       pulled into the registry   survey – derived from
                                                                                       for potential              validated community
                                                                                       enrolment in home          acquired pneumonia
                                                                                       monitoring as were all     patient questionnaire
                                                                                       positive tests             (five item survey
                                                                                       regardless of entry        queries changes in
                                                                                       point (drive up, virtual   patient reported
                                                                                       urgent care, ED,           dyspnea), later
                                                                                       inpatient admission or     extended to include
                                                                                       pre-op testing).           pulse oximetry (for
                                                                                       Nurses could enrol,        select groups inc post                            Monitored
                                          Pre-                                         triage and follow          hospitalisation) and     Online: Via patient      responses to PRO
                                          admis                                        patients - nurses          digital thermometers     portal (Epic MyChart     through portal or
                                          sion                                         contacted patients         (app also extended       electronic health        app, nurses can       Nurse to patient
                         Description of   and     Telehealth                           who tested positive        capabilities with        record) or app- nurse    reach out by          encounter, referral for
                          the service/    step-   remote              Patients with    and offered                Bluetooth pulse          managers could           phone if              physician review,
                            Published     down    patient             confirmed        opportunity to enrol in    oximeters and digital    choose which to          symptoms              physician call, referral to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
9    Ford*      USA             article   ward    monitoring     SC   COVID-19         programme.                 thermometers).           prescribe.               worsen.               ED, hospitalisation.
                                                                      Patients with    Patient attended PC        Data for risk                                     Telephone or
                                                                      COVID-19         and was triaged to         assessment:              Paper-based:             video visits, 7-
                                                                      (swab or         low, moderate or high      Demographics,            Telephone calls          days a week by
                                                                      presumed         risk using clinical        comorbidities, COVID     directed by medical      an inter-
                                                                      positive) felt   judgement. Follow-up       status, risk of          team but patients also   professional,
                         Observational                                to be high-      virtual visits were        transmission,            had access to a          family medicine
                                  study                               risk based on    booked with the            symptoms, oximeter       dedicated on-call        led team. Data
                         (retrospective           Remote              age,             resident or RN every       readings, thermometer    service 24-hours a       entered into EPIC
                                 cross-           home                comorbid         1-3 days based on          readings.                day. Pulse oximeters     using a
                              sectional   Pre-    monitoring          illness and      risk. Program aimed                                 and thermometers         standardized          ED attendance,
                                study)/   admis   model,              respiratory      to follow patients from    Data for monitoring:     were couriered to        electronic            admission, referral to
10   Agarwal*   Canada         Preprint   sion    virtual care   PC   symptoms.        time of referral up to     symptoms, oximeter       patients.                flowsheet. A          social worker.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                                      14 days from            readings, thermometer                            dashboard
                                                                                      symptom onset.          readings.                                        cataloguing each
                                                                                                                                                               patient in the
                                                                                                                                                               program with their
                                                                                                                                                               risk level for
                                                                                                                                                               deterioration and
                                                                                                                                                               active care issues
                                                                                                                                                               was developed to
                                                                                                                                                               facilitate daily
                                                                                                                                                               team
                                                                                                                                                               huddles.
                                                                                      Patient attended        Data for risk            The patient was
                                                                                      hospital and was        assessment:              required to update
                                                                                      assessed for            Demographics, clinical   their conditions on a
                                                                                      telemedicine system.    history, clinical        daily basis using the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                      The patient was given   manifestations, lab      telemedicine form.
                       Observational                                                  access to an online     tests, CT images         The patient joined a
                                study                                                 telemedicine form and                            WeChat group to         Communication
                       (retrospective                                Confirmed or     a link to the WeChat    Data for monitoring:     receive information     through
                       cohort study)/    Pre-                        suspected        app to the patient’s    changes in symptoms      and could set-up a      telemedicine form     ED attendance,
                           Published     admis   Telemedici          cases of         mobile phone or by      (including               one-to-one chat with    and WeChat            admission, mortality, need
11   Xu        China           article   sion    ne system      SC   COVID-19         email.                  temperature).            the MDT.                group.                for ECMO.
                                                                     Confirmed                                                                                 Daily monitoring
                                                                     COVID-19                                                                                  of patients
                                                                     and risk                                                                                  consists of
                                                                     factors: risk                                                                             telephonic
                                                                     factors                                                                                   outreach from a
                                                                     include age                                                                               registered nurse
                                                                     older than 60                                                                             or allied health
                                                                     or younger                                                                                professional and a
                                                                     than 3, active                                                                            self-monitoring
                                                                     immunosupp                                                                                app (MyCare
                                                                     ression,         Patients are enrolled                                                    Companion) that
                                                                     active           into the home                                                            allows for patient-
                                                                     cancer, end-     monitoring program                                                       entered data. A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                     stage renal      after an ambulatory                                                      pool of nurses
                                                                     disease on       virtual assessment      Data for risk                                    and clinicians
                                                                     dialysis,        with a clinician, or    assessment:                                      monitor the EMR
                                                                     diabetes,        after hospital          patient-reported data                            registry and flag
                                                                     hypertension,    discharge for COVID-    (clinical signs and                              symptoms that
                                                                     coronary         19. Patients receive    symptoms, medical                                are worsening.
                                                                     artery           an initial phone call   history and                                      After a nursing
                                         Pre-                        disease,         with instructions.      medications).                                    assessment, a
                                         admis   Home                heart failure    Patients from the                                                        patient may then
                            Service      sion    monitoring,         with reduced     hospital are            Data for monitoring:     Online: Patient         be escalated for
                         description/    and     home-               ejection         monitored for 7 days    Symptoms, pulse          records information     additional care       Time to escalation, ED
                          Published      step-   based               fraction,        and ambulatory          oximetry readings,       on the MyCare           (virtual call or      attendance, admission,
12   Medina*   USA            article    down    intervention   SC   chronic lung     patients for 14 days.   temperature.             Companion app.          referral to ED).      mortality.
                                                                                                                                                                                               15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                          disease,
                                                                          HIV/AIDS,
                                                                          and organ
                                                                          transplant.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                                                                                                  Stable patients
                                                                                                                                                                  contacted a
                                                                                                                                                                  minimum of once
                                                                                                                  Data for risk                                   a week, patients
                                                                                          Infection Prevention    assessment:             Online and paper-       who were deemed
                                                                                          and Control receives    Clinical and travel     based: Patients         to require more
                                                                                          positive test result.   history, symptoms,      record data on the      frequent follow-up
                                                                                          Patient contacted via   exposure.               Ontario Telemedicine    were contacted up     Time from swab collection
                                                                          Adult           phone to onboard.                               Network virtual care    to twice a day by     to first assessment,
                                Feasibility                               patients who    Follow-up was           Data for monitoring:    platform, but if they   telephone.            duration of virtual care,
                                   study/     Pre-                        tested          discontinued after      changes in symptoms     refuse, these data      Escalation            ED attendance,
                                Published     admis   Virtual care        positive for    signs of clinical       (including              were collected by       arranged by the       admission, ICU
13   Lam**       Canada            article    sion    program        SC   COVID-19.       improvement.            temperature).           phone.                  service to ED.        admission, mortality.
                                                                                                                  Data for risk
                                                                                                                  assessment:
                                                                                                                  Clinical and travel                             Data from the app
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                          Hospitalised    When patient’s          history, symptoms,                              displayed on a
                                                                          patients        clinical condition in   exposure                Online: Patient         real-time basis on
                                                      Home                considered      hospital improved,                              recorded data on an     a dashboard. Staff
                            Description of            telemonitori        appropriate     they were               Data for monitoring:    app on a daily basis.   also made calls to    ICU admission, LoS,
                 The             service/             ng, remote          for discharge   approached for the      Symptoms, pulse         Patients were able to   help with oxygen      reassessment at hospital,
                 Netherla      Published      Step-   patient             with remote     home monitoring         oximeter and            post comments on the    therapy queries       readmission, mortality,
14   Grutters*   nds                article   down    monitoring     SC   monitoring.     service.                temperature readings.   app.                    and for follow-ups.   patient experience, costs.
                            Observational                                                 Patient discharged      Data for risk           Paper-based: Patients                         Admission, resting pulse
                                     study                                Confirmed or    from ED with            assessment:             recorded                                      oximeter readings, LoS,
                             (prospective                                 suspected       confirmed or            Demographics, medical   measurements and                              ICU admission, time to
                                   study)/    Pre-    Home pulse          COVID-19        suspected COVID-19      history, lab tests      communicated these                            drop, development of
                               Published      admis   oximetry            presenting in   and were given a                                to staff once a day     Patients were         acute respiratory distress
15   Shah*       USA                article   sion    monitoring     SC   ED.             pulse oximeter.         Data for monitoring:    during a phone call.    called once a day.    syndrome, septic shock,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                                      Patients were              Symptoms, pulse                                                      mortality.
                                                                                      followed-up for 7          oximeter and
                                                                                      days.                      temperature readings.
                                                                                      Patient could be
                                                                                      added to the service                                                       Patients were
                                                                                      after testing positive,                                                    monitored by a
                                             Pre-                                     during an ED visit, a      Data for risk-          SMS based: patient      nurse as
                                             admis                                    call or telehealth visit   assessment:             received twice-daily    information
                            Description of   sion                                     with any clinician, or     symptoms                message and could       submitted by
                             the service/    and     Remote            Confirmed or   following discharge                                reply to messages       patients triggered   ED attendance,
                               Published     step-   monitoring        suspected      from an inpatient          Data for monitoring:    sent by the clinical    EHR inbox            admission, length of stay,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
16   Morgan**     USA              article   down    patients     SC   cases.         admission.                 symptoms                team.                   message.             escalation.
                                                                                                                                         Pulse oximeters were    The app triggered
                                                                                                                                         connected to an app.    an alert and the
                                                                       Confirmed      Patients who could be                              The app sent a          medical team
                            Description of                             patients       discharged from            Data for monitoring:    prompt to patients to   contacted the
                             the service/                              deemed         hospital as they did       symptoms, oxygen        record oxygen           patient and gave
                               Published     Step-   Remote            suitable for   not require                saturations (pulse      saturations 4 times a   instructions on      Readmissions, length of
17   O’Carroll*   Ireland          article   down    monitoring   SC   discharge      supplemental oxygen.       oximetry).              day.                    next steps.          stay, ICU admission
             *Used a pulse oximeter
             **Did not use pulse oximetry in the main model described in the article but flagged the launching of a companion programme or incorporating pulse oximetry
             and escalation based on oxygen saturation at a later date.
             ***Pulse oximetry added three weeks after implementation
             SC=secondary care
             PC=primary care
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          REFERENCES
          1. Levitan RM. Pulse Oximetry as a Biomarker for Early Identification and Hospitalization of
                    COVID-19 Pneumonia. Academic Emergency Medicine 2020;27(8):785-86. doi:
                    10.1111/acem.14052
          2. Goyal D. Oxygen and mortality in COVID-19 pneumonia: a comparative analysis of
                    supplemental oxygen policies and health outcomes across 26 countries. medRxiv
                    2020:2020.07.03.20145763. doi: 10.1101/2020.07.03.20145763
          3. NHS. Pulse oximetry to detect early deterioration of patients with COVID-19 in primary
                    and community care settings, 2020.
          4. Margolius D, Hennekes M, Yaho J, et al. On the Front (Phone) Lines: Results of a
                    COVID-19 Hotline in Northeast Ohio. medRxiv 2020:2020.05.08.20095745. doi:
                    10.1101/2020.05.08.20095745
          5. Thornton J. The “virtual wards” supporting patients with covid-19 in the community. BMJ :
                    British Medical Journal (Online) 2020;369 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m2119
          6. Hutchings O, Dearing C, Jagers D, et al. Virtual health care for community management
                    of patients with COVID-19. medRxiv 2020:2020.05.11.20082396. doi:
                    10.1101/2020.05.11.20082396
          7. Kricke G, et al. Rapid Implementation of an Outpatient Covid-19 Monitoring Program.
                    NEJM 2020 doi: 10.1056/CAT.20.0214.
          8. Annis T, Pleasants S, Hultman G, et al. Rapid implementation of a COVID-19 remote
                    patient monitoring program. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
                    2020;27(8):1326-30. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa097
          9. Tricco A, et al. . Rapid reviews to strengthen health policy and systems: A Practical
                    Guide, 2017.
          10. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
                    and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLOS Medicine 2009;6(7):e1000097.
                    doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097
          11. Gale NK, Heath G, Cameron E, et al. Using the framework method for the analysis of
                    qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health research. BMC Medical Research
                    Methodology 2013;13(1):117. doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-13-117
          12. O'Keefe JB, Tong EJ, Taylor TH, et al. Initial Experience in Predicting the Risk of
                    Hospitalization of 496 Outpatients with COVID-19 Using a Telemedicine Risk
                    Assessment Tool. medRxiv 2020:2020.07.21.20159384. doi:
                    10.1101/2020.07.21.20159384
          13. Medina M, Babiuch C, Card M, et al. Home monitoring for COVID-19. Cleve Clin J Med
                    2020 doi: 10.3949/ccjm.87a.ccc028
          14. Ford D, Harvey JB, McElligott J, et al. Leveraging Health System Telehealth and
                    Informatics Infrastructure to Create a Continuum of Services for COVID-19
                    Screening, Testing, and Treatment. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
                    Association 2020 doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa157
          15. Carroll O, MacCann R, Reilly A, et al. Remote monitoring of oxygen saturation in
                    individuals with COVID-19 pneumonia. European Respiratory Journal
                    2020;56(2):2001492. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01492-2020
          16. Shah S, Majmudar K, Stein A, et al. Novel Use of Home Pulse Oximetry Monitoring in
                    COVID-19 Patients Discharged From the Emergency Department Identifies Need for
                    Hospitalization. Academic Emergency Medicine 2020;27(8):681-92. doi:
                    10.1111/acem.14053
          17. Agarwal P, Mukerji G, Laur C, et al. COVIDCare@Home: Lessons from a Family
                    Medicine Led Remote Monitoring Program. medRxiv 2020:2020.07.20.20158386.
                    doi: 10.1101/2020.07.20.20158386
          18. Maghrabi ea. The Development and Implementation of a Virtual Discharge Ward for
                    Patients with COVID-19 Pneumonia: Data on The First 300 Patients. 2020
                                                                                                                              18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208587.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          19. Lam PW, Sehgal P, Andany N, et al. A virtual care program for outpatients diagnosed
                    with COVID-19: a feasibility study. CMAJ Open 2020;8(2):E407-E13. doi:
                    10.9778/cmajo.20200069
          20. Xu H, Huang S, Qiu C, et al. Monitoring and Management of Home-Quarantined Patients
                    With COVID-19 Using a WeChat-Based Telemedicine System: Retrospective Cohort
                    Study. J Med Internet Res 2020;22(7):e19514. doi: 10.2196/19514 [published Online
                    First: 2.7.2020]
          21. Grutters LA, Majoor KI, Mattern ESK, et al. Home telemonitoring makes early hospital
                    discharge of COVID-19 patients possible. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020:ocaa168.
                    doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa168
          22. Morgan ea. Remote monitoring of patients with COVID-19: Design, implementation and
                    outcomes of the first 3,000 patients in COVID Watch. NEJM 2020
          23. Su D, Michaud TL, Estabrooks P, et al. Diabetes Management Through Remote Patient
                    Monitoring: The Importance of Patient Activation and Engagement with the
                    Technology. Telemedicine and e-Health 2018;25(10):952-59. doi:
                    10.1089/tmj.2018.0205
          24. Kew KM, Cates CJ. Home telemonitoring and remote feedback between clinic visits for
                    asthma. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016(8) doi:
                    10.1002/14651858.CD011714.pub2
          25. Davidoff F, Dixon-Woods M, Leviton L, et al. Demystifying theory and its use in
                    improvement. BMJ Quality &amp;amp; Safety 2015;24(3):228. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-
                    2014-003627
          26. Majumdar SR, Eurich DT, Gamble J-M, et al. Oxygen Saturations Less than 92% Are
                    Associated with Major Adverse Events in Outpatients with Pneumonia: A Population-
                    Based Cohort Study. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2011;52(3):325-31. doi:
                    10.1093/cid/ciq076
          27. Luks AM, Swenson ER. Pulse Oximetry for Monitoring Patients with COVID-19 at Home.
                    Potential Pitfalls and Practical Guidance. Annals of the American Thoracic Society
                    2020;17(9):1040-46. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.202005-418FR
          28. McGillicuddy JW, Weiland AK, Frenzel RM, et al. Patient Attitudes Toward Mobile
                    Phone-Based Health Monitoring: Questionnaire Study Among Kidney Transplant
                    Recipients. J Med Internet Res 2013;15(1):e6. doi: 10.2196/jmir.2284 [published
                    Online First: 08.01.2013]
          29. Seto E, Leonard KJ, Masino C, et al. Attitudes of Heart Failure Patients and Health care
                    Providers towards Mobile Phone-Based Remote Monitoring. J Med Internet Res
                    2010;12(4):e55. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1627 [published Online First: 29.11.2010]
          30. Park, S. et al. Strengthening the UK primary care response to COVID-19. BMJ 2020;
                    370.
                                                                                                                              19
