medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Whole genome sequencing delineates regulatory and novel genic variants in childhood
                                                             cardiomyopathy
Robert Lesurf1, PhD†, Abdelrahman Said1, PhD†, Oyediran Akinrinade1, PhD, Jeroen Breckpot2, PhD,
Kathleen Delfosse1, MSc, Ting Liu1, PhD, Roderick Yao1, BSc, Fintan McKenna1, BSc, Ramil R.
Noche1,4, PhD, Winona Oliveros5, MSc, Kaia Mattioli6, PhD, Anastasia Miron1, HBA, Qian Yang1,
PhD, Guoliang Meng7, PhD, Michelle Chan Seng Yue8, BSc, Wilson WL Sung9, Bhooma
Thiruvahindrapuram9, Genomics England Research Consortium10,11, Jane Lougheed12, M.D, Erwin
Oechslin13, M.D, Lynn Bergin14, M.D, John Smythe15, M.D, Tapas Mondal16, M.D, Marta Melé5, PhD,
Philipp G. Maass1,3, PhD, James Ellis3,7, PhD, Stephen W. Scherer1,3,9,17 PhD, Seema Mital*1,18,19, M.D
†co-first authors
1
  Genetics and Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
2
  Department of Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
3
  Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
4
  Zebrafish Genetics and Disease Models Core, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
5
  Life Sciences Department, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
6
  Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
7
  Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
8
  Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
9
  The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
10
   Genomics England, London, UK
11
   William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
12
   Division of Cardiology, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
13
   Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, Division of Cardiology, Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
14
   Division of Cardiology, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada
15
   Department of Pediatrics, Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
16
   Department of Pediatrics, Hamilton Health Sciences Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
17
   McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
18
   Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
19
   Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
Corresponding Author:
Seema Mital, MD
Hospital for Sick Children,
555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.
Tel: 416-813-7418; Fax: 416-813-5857
E-mail: seema.mital@sickkids.ca
                                                                          1
        NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
ABSTRACT
Cardiomyopathy (CMP) is a heritable genetic disorder. Protein-coding variants account for 20-30% of
cases. The contribution of variants in non-coding DNA elements that regulate gene expression has not
been explored. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 228 unrelated CMP families.
Besides pathogenic protein-coding variants in known CMP genes, 5% cases harbored rare loss-of-
function variants in novel cardiac genes, with NRAP and FHOD3 being strong candidates. WGS also
revealed a high burden of high-risk variants in promoters and enhancers of CMP genes in an additional
20% cases (Odds ratio 2.14, 95% CI 1.60-2.86, p=5.26×10-7 vs 1326 controls) with genes involved in α-
dystroglycan glycosylation (FKTN, DTNA) and desmosomal signaling (DSC2, DSG2) specifically
enriched for regulatory variants (False discovery rate <0.03). These findings were independently
replicated in the Genomics England CMP cohort (n=1266). The functional effect of non-coding variants
on transcription was functionally validated in patient myocardium and reporter assays in human
cardiomyocytes, and that of novel gene variants in zebrafish knockouts. Our results show that
functionally active variants in novel genes and in regulatory elements of CMP genes contribute strongly
to the genomic etiology of childhood-onset CMP.
Key words: Cardiomyopathy, whole genome sequencing, regulatory variants, massively parallel reporter
assay, CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing
                                                                       2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
INTRODUCTION
Cardiomyopathy (CMP) is a genetic disease of heart muscle with a prevalence of 1:500 to 1:2500 in the
general population (depending on CMP type). Over 20 million people worldwide are estimated to be
living with the disease1. The actual prevalence is estimated to be even higher given that many patients
who carry a gene defect have not manifested the disease yet. Several thousand new cases of CMP are
diagnosed each year in North America alone2. Over a third of the cases are inherited while the remainder
are sporadic3. Majority are autosomal dominant in nature caused by rare damaging variants in genes that
impact muscle structure and function4,5. There are five phenotypes – hypertrophic (HCM), dilated
(DCM), restrictive (RCM), left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC) and
arrhythmogenic ventricular cardiomyopathy (AVC). The disease has a high penetrance in childhood6
with CMP being the leading cause of heart failure and sudden cardiac death in children7. The greater
severity of disease in childhood onset CMP is presumed to be related in part to genetic differences that
have not been systematically evaluated8.
There is considerable genetic overlap between different CMP subtypes. While sarcomeric genes
including MYH7 and MYBPC3, explain ~50% of all HCM cases, other CMPs are more polygenic, and
despite the inclusion of upwards of 100 putative CMP disease genes in clinical diagnostic testing panels,
over 70% of CMPs remain gene-elusive (including familial cases)9–11. This is in part because the
standard gene panel tests typically only capture small sequence-level variants within the coding regions
of known CMP genes, and miss hard to sequence regions, most intronic splicing events, structural
variation, and novel genes not included on the panels. Importantly, these tests do not evaluate the non-
coding genome that harbors DNA regulatory sequences including core and proximal promoters and
enhancers, as well as distal regulatory elements12. These variants can disrupt the transcriptional
activation process through multiple mechanisms including alterations in chromatin structure, non-coding
RNA, transcript stability, and importantly, through the alteration of the DNA sequence of transcription
factor binding sites (TFBS).
A growing number of whole genome sequencing (WGS) studies are identifying novel genetic variants in
pediatric and familial disease13–15. In autism spectrum disorder, a complex genetic condition, WGS has
enabled identification of putative non-coding regions as hotspots for de novo germline variants16,17, new
candidate risk genes18, and novel mechanisms of mutation only discovered by WGS19,20. More recently,
WGS identified a higher burden of de novo variants in the enhancers of disease-associated genes in
congenital heart disease patients compared with controls21. However, only 5 of the 31 enhancers
identified were associated with altered transcription levels of the target genes. Compared to CHD which
is a complex disorder that includes not only genetic but also environmental causes, the role of regulatory
variants has not been explored in CMP, a primarily genetic disorder.
Here, we used WGS to characterize all classes of genetic variation in a unique and exhaustively-
phenotyped cohort ascertained for childhood-onset CMP. WGS identified 11 novel genes important for
clinical diagnostic testing, and also identified a significantly higher burden of regulatory variants in
CMP genes in 20% of cases compared to controls, findings that were replicated in an independent CMP
cohort. The function of the most important variants identified was confirmed through a study of
endogenous gene expression in patient myocardium, human cell-based assays22,23 and CRISPR gene
editing of zebrafish embryos, providing a paradigm for WGS interpretation in future genomic studies of
childhood-onset CMP as well as other genetic disorders.
RESULTS
                                                                       3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Variant yield on WGS in the discovery cohort
The discovery cohort consisted of 228 unrelated probands <21 years old at diagnosis with primary CMP,
and 69 affected and unaffected family members (Supplementary Table 1). The cohort included 49%
DCM, 33% HCM, 7% LVNC, 6% RCM, and 3% AVC. 29% of cases had a positive family history of
CMP. WGS was performed on genomic DNA using Illumina HiSeq X platform at a median sequencing
coverage of 31X (range: 20-50X). We interrogated 133 genes represented in different commercial CMP
gene panels (Supplementary Table 2) for rare [population minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.01%],
predicted damaging missense, loss-of-function (LoF) (frameshift, stopgain/stoploss, splicing) and high-
risk regulatory variants. Figure 1a depicts the workflow for filtering pathogenic and likely pathogenic
protein-coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs), insertion-deletions (indels), copy number variants
(CNVs), and high-risk regulatory variants in the overall cohort. Protein-coding variants were classified
as pathogenic (including likely pathogenic) using the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG)
criteria17,24–30. Pathogenic protein-coding SNVs and indels in known CMP genes were detected in
78/228 (34%) cases, and CNVs in 6/228 (2%) cases. Only two cases harbored homozygous variants. An
additional 20% cases harbored high-risk variants in regulatory elements of CMP genes, and 5% cases
harbored likely pathogenic LoF variants in novel candidate genes (Figure 1b). Variant distribution by
CMP subtype, by patient and by gene category is shown in Figures 1c-e.
Protein-coding variants in known CMP genes
Protein-coding SNVs and CNVs are described in Supplementary Tables 3 & 4. The majority (64%) of
pathogenic protein-coding variants were in sarcomeric genes which represented a significant enrichment
compared to other gene categories (binomial p=3.16×10-49). HCM cases had a higher yield of pathogenic
protein-coding variants compared to other CMP subtypes with odds ratio (OR) 3.14, 95% confidence
intervals (CI) 1.77-5.57 (p=1.22×10-4). Of note, WGS detected pathogenic protein-coding variants in
17/228 (7.5%) cases previously missed by panel-based clinical genetic testing since not all CMP genes
are captured by commercial testing panels, and none of the gene panels explore for CNVs31.
Effect of protein-coding variants on myocardial expression of target genes: A unique feature of our
biobank is access to myocardial samples from patients undergoing surgery or cardiac transplantation.
RNA sequencing was performed in LV myocardial samples from 35 sequenced CMP patients to validate
the effect of LoF SNVs and CNVs on gene expression. Figure 2a-c shows that candidate gene mRNA
expression was below the 25th percentile in the myocardium of patients harbouring LoF SNVs (DSC2,
FLNC, MYBPC3) compared to the remaining cohort. Endogenous gene expression levels were also
reduced in patients with single copy deletion CNVs impacting both the promoter and first exons of the
genes JPH2 and NEXN, and exon 11 of CTNNA3 (Figure 2d-f). The ability to show the impact of
coding variants on endogenous gene expression in the target organ is a unique finding that supports the
use of patient myocardium to validate variant pathogenicity.
Protein-coding LoF variants in novel CMP genes
WGS provided us an opportunity to explore for novel biologically relevant genes beyond known CMP
genes as potential sources of pathogenic coding variants. We searched for rare (gnomAD MAF<0.01%)
predicted deleterious heterozygous and homozygous LoF variants in genes involved in heart function
with moderate-high heart expression, that were deemed to be constrained for LoF variants32,33. Using
these criteria, we identified rare LoF variants in 11 novel genes in CMP patients who did not harbor a
pathogenic protein-coding variant (5% of the cohort) (Supplementary Table 5). Exploration of 1266
independent CMP probands in the 100,000 Genomes Project replication cohort identified rare
heterozygous or homozygous LoF variants in five of these novel genes (FHOD3, NRAP, PDE4DIP,
                                                                       4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
PTGDS, and TRPM4). FHOD3 harbored the highest proportion of LoF variants, with variants identified
in five additional CMP cases from the 100,000 Genomes Project as opposed to only one ICGC control
sample.
Of these 11 genes, we explored FHOD3 and NRAP further as strong candidates since they are known to
have high heart-specific expression34,35, are important in the maintenance of sarcomeric and actin
cytoskeleton in the heart, and have been associated with CMP in mouse studies and in small case
series36–43. In our cohort, we found a rare frameshift variant in FHOD3 in a DCM patient and a rare
homozygous frameshift variant in NRAP in a DCM patient born of consanguineous parents.
Interestingly, the FHOD3 frameshift deletion at chr18:36652786 observed in our cohort was also found
in a case from the 100,000 Genomes Project (Supplementary Table 6). The distribution of LoF variants
in NRAP is displayed in Figure 3a and FHOD3 in Figure 3b for the discovery cohort, 100,000
Genomes Project replication cohort, and gnomAD. Using LV myocardium from the patient with the
NRAP variant, we confirmed that NRAP mRNA expression (using RNAseq and targeted qRT-PCR) and
protein expression (on Western blot) were significantly downregulated in the patient harboring the
variant compared to other CMP patients who did not harbor this variant (Figure 3c).
Effect of CRISPR-Cas9 knockout of novel genes in zebrafish: To confirm a role for these novel genes
in cardiac structure and function in vivo, we induced directed knockout of nrap and fhod3 in zebrafish
embryos through yolk sac injection of sets of 4 CRISPR-Cas9 guide RNA (gRNA) complexes that
redundantly target a single gene and induce efficient knockout to permit rapid screening for gene
function44,45 (Figure 3d-g). Sanger sequencing revealed a high burden of variants with a high cutting
efficiency by 4 gRNAs targeting the exons of nrap, fhod3a, and fhod3b compared to 0% in Cas9 only
controls (Supplementary Figure 1). qRT-PCR showed a 0.64-fold downregulation of nrap, and a 0.4-
fold downregulation of fhod3a and fhod3b in CRISPR-Cas9 edited embryos compared to controls
(Figure 3d). Phenotypic analysis revealed significant atrial enlargement in gene-edited embryos
compared to either wild type or Cas9 only controls (p<0.01 vs controls for all genes) (Figure 3e).
Ventricular end-diastolic area was significantly reduced in gene-edited embryos compared to wild-type
or Cas9 controls (Figure 3f-g) but ventricular ejection fraction was preserved (wild type 36±2%, Cas9
34±4%, nrap mutants 37±3% and fhod3ab mutants 42±2%), suggesting a restrictive CMP phenotype in
embryos with defects in nrap, and fhod3. Together, these studies provide support for a role for LoF
variants in novel genes like NRAP and FHOD3 in causing CMP.
Regulatory variants of CMP genes
We generated an atlas of functionally active regulatory elements of cardiac-expressed genes across the
genome. This was done by mapping non-coding regions in the human heart that putatively regulate the
transcription of cardiac-active genes based on experimental data assembled from heart-related
epigenetic, DNAse, and histone ChIP-seq data deposited in ENCODE and other databases46–49. We
defined promoter regions of the CMP genes by merging the DNase-seq peaks of open chromatin and
histone marks specific for promoters and enhancers in cardiac tissues. Where this information was not
available, we defined promoter regions as 1.5kb upstream and 1kb downstream of the transcription start
site (TSS). For this study, we focussed on promoters and enhancers of known CMP genes rather than the
entire genome to avoid false-positive results related to genes with an unclear association with CMP. We
mapped SNVs to the active regulatory regions and defined them as Tier 1 if they were rare i.e. MAF
<0.01% in population controls, and were predicted to alter transcription factor (TF) binding by at least 3
of 4 prediction tools that predict if a sequence alteration affects a likely TFBS or chromatin effects with
single-nucleotide sensitivity50–53 (see Methods).
                                                                       5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
We further prioritized variants that had at least a 1.3-fold enrichment in cases compared to controls, that
were in regulatory elements active in the human left ventricle (LV), and that were seen in gene-elusive
cases (i.e. those without pathogenic coding variants in CMP genes). This provided a final prioritized list
of 52 high-risk Tier 1 variants in 19% of the cohort (Figure 4a). Two additional patients harbored high-
risk CNVs in regulatory elements of BAG3 and TGFB3 (Supplementary Table 4). For case-control
burden analysis, we used WGS data from 1326 cancer patients without heart disease from the
International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)54. This confirmed an enrichment of regulatory
variants in CMP genes in cases compared to controls (OR 2.14, 95% CI 1.60-2.86, p=5.26×10-7) (Figure
4b). Supplementary Table 7 provides details of the high-risk regulatory variants. The top 4 genes
significantly enriched for regulatory variants were in pathways related to (i) α-dystroglycan
glycosylation important in sarcomere structure i.e. FKTN (OR 53.2, CI 2.9-991), and DTNA (OR 5.6, CI
2.5-12.5), and (ii) desmosomal signaling i.e. DSC2 (OR 29.3, CI 1.4-611) and DSG2 (OR 9.7, CI 1.2-74)
(Figure 4c). None of the variants were de novo amongst probands with complete trio data. Additional
candidate Tier 1 variants in these and other genes important in these two signaling systems are also
described in the table even though they did not meet all the high-risk criteria.
We extended our analysis to an independent replication cohort of 1266 CMP probands with WGS data
from the 100,000 Genomes Project. There was a positive correlation between the discovery and
replication cohorts for genes enriched for high-risk regulatory variants (Spearman ρ2 0.737, p=1.02×10-
8
 ) with the top genes being similar in both CMP cohorts (FKTN, DTNA, DSC2, DSG2) with ORs ranging
from 3.14-13.7 (Figure 4d).
Pathway enrichment analysis: A comparison of pathways enriched for protein-coding versus regulatory
variants was performed using Gene Ontology and Reactome55–57 databases. Pathogenic protein-coding
variants were enriched in a narrow set of gene categories directly related to muscle contraction,
including binding of actin, troponin C, calmodulin, and protein kinase (Supplementary Figure 2a). In
contrast, high-risk regulatory variants were enriched not only in genes involved in processes related to
muscle contraction, but also in additional diverse pathways related to ERK/Ras signaling, fibroblast
growth factor receptor signaling, and tyrosine kinase signaling (Supplementary Figure 2b). Unlike
protein-coding variants, none of the high-risk regulatory variants were in sarcomeric genes. There were
only six genes (DSC2, DSG2, JPH2, LAMP2, NEXN, PRKAG2) that harbored high-risk variants in both
coding and regulatory regions.
Of note, a high proportion i.e. 44 (19%) cases harbored multiple coding and/or regulatory variants in
known CMP genes which included 5% with multiple protein-coding variants, 4% with multiple
regulatory variants, and 10% with a combination of both variant types (Figure 1d). Multiple variants in
a third of patients were in genes important in myocardial architecture i.e. sarcomeric, cytoskeletal,
desmosomal and other structural genes. Multiple variants were more common in HCM cases compared
with other CMP subtypes (OR=3.4, CI=1.7-6.6, p=5.75×10-4).
Functional assessment of regulatory variants: We prioritized Tier 1 regulatory variants in 6 genes
(BRAF, DSP, DTNA, FKRP, FKTN, LARGE1, PRKAG2, TGFB3) for functional analyses based on the
availability of left ventricular (LV) myocardium from variant-positive patients. Figure 5 shows high-
risk regulatory variants identified in these eight genes in our discovery cohort and the 100,000 Genomes
Project cohort, overlaid on the background of the frequency distribution in the Genome Aggregation
Database (gnomAD) reference population33. Most of the regulatory loci were depleted of variants in
gnomAD suggesting highly constrained loci. Supplementary Figure 3 shows the single nucleotide
                                                                       6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
change in the variant of interest in our discovery cohort compared to wild-type sequence and the
predicted effect on TF binding motifs58.
Association of regulatory variants with myocardial gene expression: The ability to show a change in
myocardial gene expression provides critical evidence for the effect of regulatory variants on
endogenous gene transcription. mRNA and protein expression was measured using RNAseq, qRT-PCR
and Western blot or immunohistochemistry in 35 patients where LV myocardium was available.
Myocardial expression was compared in the patient harboring the variant to controls without CMP or
patients with CMP not harboring the variant.
We evaluated promoter variants in BRAF, DSP, FKTN, and LARGE1 proximal to the corresponding TSS
that were predicted to alter TF binding. When compared to controls and/or variant-negative CMP
patients, BRAF mRNA showed a 0.76-fold downregulation on qRT-PCR in the patient harboring a
promoter variant (chr7:140624223_G/A) (Figure 6a). The DSP variant (chr6:7541776_G/A) was
associated with higher myocardial expression of DSP on both RNA-seq (above the 75th percentile for the
cohort) and on qRT-PCR (1.6-fold upregulation) (Figure 6b). FKTN promoter variant
(chr9:108320330_G/A) was associated with lower FKTN expression in a RCM patient on RNAseq, on
qRT-PCR (0.5-fold downregulation), and on Western blot (0.24-fold downregulation) (Figure 6c). In an
HCM patient harboring a LARGE1 promoter variant (chr22:34316416_C/T), immunohistochemistry
showed reduced peri-nuclear LARGE1 protein expression in the patient compared to controls (Figure
6d). The PRKAG2 enhancer variant (chr7:151392181_A/C) found in a DCM patient was associated with
a 1.4-fold upregulation on qRT-PCR and a 1.5-fold upregulation on Western blot in patient myocardium
(Figure 6e). Myocardial TGFB3 expression in a RCM patient with a high-risk enhancer variant
(chr14:76289218_A/G) predicted to interact with the TGFB3 promoter48 was associated with higher
mRNA expression on RNA-seq, a 4.2-fold upregulation of mRNA on qRT-PCR, and 1.5-fold
upregulation of TGFB3 protein on Western blot compared to controls (Figure 6f). These findings that
are derived directly from the myocardium of patients harboring variants of interest confirmed that SNVs
within key regulatory elements are associated with an important impact on functional gene products and
provide important supporting evidence for variant pathogenicity.
Effect of regulatory variants on gene transcription using reporter assays:
Luciferase reporter assay: Gene promoters or enhancer+promoters harboring candidate SNVs and the
corresponding control region were cloned into Firefly Luciferase reporters and transfected into human
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes to determine the effect of the variants on
the transcription activity of the luciferase reporter gene (Supplementary Figure 4a). The cloned
promoter variants of BRAF (chr7:140624223_G/A), DTNA (chr18:32072866_A/G), FKRP
(chr19:47249754_C/T), FKTN (chr9:108319991_A/C, chr9:108320330_G/A), and LARGE1
(chr22:34316416_C/T) reduced luciferase activity compared to reference sequences. The promoter
variant of DSP (chr6:7541776_G/A), a second promoter variant of LARGE1 (chr22:34316687_G/A),
and an enhancer variant of TGFB3 (chr14:76289218_A/G) significantly increased luciferase activity
compared to reference sequences (Figure 7a). The altered transcriptional regulation of the luciferase
reporter by inserting promoter and enhancer variants of several CMP genes suggests a direct regulatory
effect of these SNPs on target gene transcription.
Massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA): To assess the functional effect of additional Tier 1
regulatory variants on transcriptional activity, we used the higher throughput MPRA in
cardiomyocytes22,23. Specifically, we tested the regulatory effects of 54 variants by dissecting the
                                                                       7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
transcriptional activities of their reference and alternative alleles (each allele represented by 25 unique
barcodes, see Methods) in PGP17 iPSC-cardiomyocytes (n=5 independent replicates) (Supplementary
Figure 4b-e, Supplementary Table 8). Of the 54 variants examined, 29 variants (54%) showed
significant transcriptional differences between the two alleles [False discovery rate (FDR)<0.05]
(Figure 7b,c) with log2-fold change ranging from -2.72 to +2.23 (Figure 7d, Supplementary Table 8).
This represented 26 additional variants with high regulatory activity besides the ones validated in the
previous myocardial and luciferase reporter assays. Representative examples for MPRA counts show
high regulatory activity of variants in BRAF, DSP, and DTNA loci (Figure 7e). Overall, the MPRA
findings confirm that our WGS confidently identified variants that are functionally active in
cardiomyocytes.
In summary, our findings using WGS revealed a significant contribution of regulatory variants and
CNVs in CMP genes (in 20% of cases), and a small but notable contribution of LoF protein-coding
variants in novel genes (in an additional 5% of cases) to childhood onset CMP.
DISCUSSION
WGS yields a large number of germline protein-coding and regulatory variants. An understanding of
their contribution to human disease has been hampered by lack of stringent bioinformatics and
functional approaches tailored to the disease under study. Using WGS in CMP, we identified deleterious
protein-coding variants in 36% of our cohort, including 7.5% who had been missed despite clinical
testing of candidate genes. Moreover, we found 5% of patients with deleterious variants in novel CMP
genes and, very importantly, another 20% with high-risk regulatory variants not previously reported in
CMP. An important subset of these regulatory variants were confirmed to have an effect on exogenous
and endogenous gene expression in functional assays thereby providing strong evidence for their
contribution to CMP. The discovery and validation of these novel variants reduced by half the number of
gene-elusive CMP cases in our cohort.
Of the novel genes harboring deleterious protein-coding variants, two genes, NRAP and FHOD3,
emerged as strong candidates. Both are important in the maintenance of sarcomeric and actin
cytoskeleton in the heart and have been associated with CMP in mouse studies and small case series36–
43,59,60
         . Our proband was homozygous for a LoF variant in NRAP similar to a previously reported family
with an autosomal recessive DCM phenotype39. Moreover, a high burden of variants in these genes was
also found in our replication cohort. The reduced expression of NRAP in patient myocardium combined
with the findings of reduced nrap and fhod3 expression and a CMP phenotype in zebrafish knockouts
provides supporting evidence for NRAP and FHOD3 being novel genes that should be considered as
strong candidate genes for clinical testing in CMP.
A tremendously exciting finding of our study was the enrichment of high-impact regulatory SNVs and
CNVs in cases compared to controls, with 20% cases harboring these variants in recurrently mutated
regions active in the human LV. When analyzed by CMP subtype, the yield of high-risk regulatory
variants was higher in non-HCM CMPs in which protein-coding variants only account for a small
proportion of the cases. Overall, the regulatory variants were enriched not only in pathways related to
muscle contraction but also in α-dystroglycan binding, desmosomal signaling and ERK/Ras signaling.
Although coding variants in these pathways typically cause multi-system involvement, we did not
observe systemic features in patients harboring non-coding variants in these genes. It is possible that the
effect of regulatory variants is restricted to the heart unlike coding variants that impact protein function
                                                                       8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
in multiple tissues. Also, sarcomeric genes were less impacted by regulatory variants likely because they
are more tolerant to haplo-insufficiency.
A notable gene set with dysregulated expression involved DTNA, FKTN, FKRP, LARGE1, and POMT,
that are essential for α-dystroglycan function through post- translational glycosylation. Dystroglycan is a
central component of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex, where it functions as a transmembrane
linker, anchoring the cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix and plays a role in myocyte, sarcolemma
and sarcomere stability61,62. Disruption of glycosylation has been associated with severe cardiac
dysfunction in FKTN or LARGE1-deficient mice and with DCM (with mild to no skeletal muscle
involvement) often in the context of homozygous or compound heterozygous variants63–65. We also
found an enrichment of regulatory variants disrupting the expression of desmosomal genes (DSG2,
DSC2, JUP, DSP) in which both missense and LoF variants have been reported to cause AVC, DCM
and RCM, similar to patients in our cohort66.
A strength of our study was the ability to functionally validate the effect of the regulatory variants on
gene and protein expression. We confirmed that the activity of a luciferase reporter gene was altered
under the effect of the variant promoter/enhancer sequences compared to wild-type control in human
cardiomyocytes67,68. We recognize that luciferase reporter assays are not able to assess for regulatory
variants that affect chromatin structure. However, we defined promoters of CMP genes by merging the
DNase-seq peaks of open chromatin and histone marks specific for promoters and enhancers obtained
from cardiac tissue. Moreover, we were able to show that endogenous gene expression was altered in the
LV myocardium of patients harboring these variants, a truly unique strength of our study. For example,
upregulated myocardial TGFB3 has been observed in patients with DCM or HCM, but this is the first
instance of a variant in the regulatory element of this gene being associated with upregulated TGFB3
expression in patient myocardium69,70. Similarly, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
reduced target gene expression in the myocardium of patients harboring Tier 1 promoter variants as well
as those harboring CNVs involving candidate CMP genes71–74. Importantly, using MPRA, we were able
to demonstrate a significant regulatory effect of a larger subset of high-risk variants associated with
these genes, reinforcing the strength of our variant selection strategy75–78. Together, these findings not
only represent an important advance in our understanding of the cardiac regulome, but also provide
novel insights into the genomic architecture of childhood CMP and add to the discovery of non-coding
variants in human disease21.
Similar to previous reports, we found multiple coding variants in 5% of cases which have been reported
to contribute to a more severe phenotype79. In our cohort, we were also able to find co-occurrence of not
only coding SNVs but also CNVs. Two patients with HCM, one with a pathogenic MYBPC3 SNV and
MYOM1 CNV died, and another with a LoF splice-site variant in FLNC and a deletion CNV in CTNNA3
required heart transplantation within the first year of life. A particularly intriguing finding from our
study was that as many as 14% cases harbored multiple high-risk regulatory variants, sometimes in
conjunction with a pathogenic coding variant. These variants were all found in genes important in
myocyte structure. Further studies are needed to examine the association of multiple regulatory variants
with disease severity.
The role of regulatory variants may have been underestimated in our study since we did not explore
distal enhancers. Also, TFBS that do not resemble the consensus sequence could have been misclassified
as not being high-risk. As in silico predictions improve with time, it will enable more widespread
exploration of the regulome for disease variants. Finally, we were limited in our ability to evaluate
endogenous gene expression due to the small number of available myocardial samples.
                                                                       9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Overall, our findings that high confidence variants identified using in silico prediction models have
functional consequences validates our bioinformatics approach to novel variant discovery and makes a
strong case for exploring variants in recurrently mutated cis-regulatory elements of CMP genes in order
to increase the yield of genetic testing80,81. In summary, our work provides a guiding strategy to address
regulatory variants in cardiac disease and emphasizes the need for further research to validate the
clinical utility of these findings.
METHODS
Study cohort
The study cohort comprised unrelated primary CMP index cases less than 21 years old at diagnosis, and
affected and unaffected family members, recruited between 2007-2018 through the Heart Centre
Biobank at The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto80. HCM, DCM, RCM, LVNC and AVC were
diagnosed based on published clinical criteria82,83. Patients with secondary CMPs resulting from inborn
errors of metabolism, mitochondrial disorders, syndromic, and neuromuscular etiologies were excluded.
Clinical data including demographics, diagnosis, family history, clinical genetic testing results, and
outcomes during follow-up were captured. The median age at diagnosis was 2.8 years (range 0-20), 42%
were female. Major self-reported ethnicities were 71% White, 17% Asian, 6% Black. 26% of cases were
genotype-positive on previous clinical panel testing, 47% were genotype-negative, and 27% were
clinically untested. Ten cases (4.7%) died, and 130 cases (57%) experienced a major adverse cardiac
event on follow-up (Supplementary Table 1). Collection and use of human DNA and myocardial tissue
from CMP cases through the Heart Centre Biobank Registry was approved by the Institutional Research
Ethics Boards (Hospital for Sick Children, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Toronto General
Hospital, London Health Sciences Centre, Kingston General Hospital, and Hamilton Health Sciences
Centre) and written informed consent was obtained from all patients and/or their parents / legal
guardians80,81.
Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
WGS was performed on high quality DNA from blood or saliva to achieve a minimum of 30-fold
coverage using Illumina HiSeq X platform through Macrogen, South Korea, and The Centre for Applied
Genomics (TCAG, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto). High quality paired-end reads (2x150bp) were
mapped to human genome reference sequence (hg19) using Isaac aligner and variants were called using
Isaac      variant         caller84.         WGS          quality      metrics       were        calculated       using         mosdepth
(https://github.com/brentp/mosdepth)85. Samples with average genome-wide coverage less than 10X
were excluded from further analysis. Variants passing default Isaac variant caller quality metrics were
annotated using snpEff (v.4.3)86 and annovar (v.2016.02.01)87. Variants used for downstream analysis
were further required to have a ‘PASS’ flag in the ‘FILTER’ field. SNVs were additionally required to
have a total filtered read depth (‘DP’) ≥ 10X, while indels were additionally required to have a total
filtered read depth at the position preceding the indel (‘DPI’) ≥ 10X. The total number of SNVs per
sample was calculated using bcftools88.
Protein-coding variants in CMP genes
By mining data from Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database, various commercially
available CMP gene panels, manual curation from literature, we compiled a primary list of 133
candidate genes with strong association with CMPs (Supplementary Table 2). Mitochondrial genes
were excluded. We developed computational workflows for interpretation of SNVs (missense, splicing,
LoF), indels and CNVs in coding and non-coding regions.
                                                                      10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Protein-coding SNVs and indels: We developed a custom variant classification workflow for the
identification of pathogenic protein-coding and splice-site SNVs based on the ACMG 2015 guidelines24.
The automated variant classification pipeline was based on information from different sources including
ClinVar89 and Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD)90 to determine previously reported pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants. 1000 Genomes91, NHLBI-ESP92, Exome Aggregation Consortium
(ExAC), and genome aggregation database (gnomAD) were used as reference controls to filter for rare
variants defined as MAF < 0.01%93. Pathogenicity of missense variants was predicted using prediction
scores from at least five prediction tools including SIFT94, PolyPhen295, MutationTaster296, Mutation
Assessor97, CADD27, PROVEAN25, phylogenetic p-value from the PHAST package for multiple
alignments of 99 vertebrate genomes to the human genome (phyloP100way_vertebrate)98, MetaSVM
and MetaLR26. Genomic conservation score was obtained from GERP++99, and phastCons12. Putative
protein-truncating variants predicted to cause loss of function including splice-site, nonsense and
frameshift variants were assessed and annotated using LOFTEE tool (https://github.com/konradjk/loftee)
as a plugin via Ensembl’s Variant Effect Predictor (VEP v90) tool100. The pathogenicity of variants
identified on clinical testing was verified using ClinVar89 and InterVar101 classifications where possible.
Segregation and de novo analysis was performed on all variants when WGS from family members was
available. SNVs and indels in CMP genes that met the pathogenicity criteria described above, and that
further had a MAF<0.01% in the gnomAD v2.1.1 reference population, were considered causal for
CMP. These likely causal variants were reviewed and confirmed through independent classification by
the institutional molecular genetic testing laboratory and all reportable SNVs were confirmed using
Sanger sequencing where possible.
Protein-coding CNVs: For CNV calling, two read-depth-based algorithms, ERDS v1.1 (estimation by
read depth with SNVs)102 and CNVnator v0.3.2103, were used as previously described29. Identified CNV
regions were annotated using a custom annotation pipeline developed at TCAG. To increase call
confidence, only CNV regions >1kb in size with at least 50% reciprocal overlap between ERDS and
CNVnator calls and and <70% overlap with telomeres, centromeres and segmental duplications were
included in downstream analyses. Rare CNVs were defined as variants occurring at < 1% frequency in
over 1500 QC pass parental samples from an autism cohort, MSSNG18. Using human genome CNV
map30, CNV events overlapping CNV regions that were <30% copy number prone were prioritized for
downstream analyses. Rare CNVs >1kb in size, impacting coding exons were manually inspected using
reads from BAM files and were further validated using qPCR with 100% concordance. Patients that did
not harbor at least one causal variant (i.e. rare, protein-coding pathogenic SNV or CNV in CMP genes)
were considered gene-elusive, and were further evaluated for protein-coding variants in novel genes and
in regulatory elements of known CMP genes.
De novo variant analysis: Complete parent-offspring trios were available in 22 cases. To identify de
novo variants, we built a full Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)/v4.1.2.0 best practices104 workflow
locally for joint calling of short variants (SNVs and indels) within our cohort. Paired-end raw reads were
first trimmed and cleaned by trimmomatic v.0.32, then mapped to human reference genome GRCh37 per
sample by using bwa v.0.7.15. The reference genome sequence and training dataset were downloaded
from the GATK bundle site (ftp.broadinstitute.org/bundle/b37). Mapped reads were realigned and
calibrated by Base Quality Score Recalibration (BQSR) tools. HaplotypeCaller was used to generate
genotype VCF (gVCF) files for each sample. Finally, the gVCF files for all the samples were combined
and joint-called by using CombineGVCFs and GenotypeGVCFs tools. In order to filter out probable
artifacts in the calls, SNPs and indels were recalibrated separately by Variant Quality Score
Recalibration (VQSR) tools, and variants that passed VQSR truth sensitivity level 99.5 for SNPs and
                                                                      11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
level 99.0 for indels were retained. We deployed the GATK refinement workflow to identify de novo
variants that were deemed pathogenic or likely pathogenic per ACMG criteria. To infer possible high
confidence de novo sites, we first recalculated phred-scaled genotype likelihoods of the samples by
introducing 1000 Genomes project call set (1000G_phase3_v4_20130502) and pedigrees of the trios.
These additional data can be used as prior knowledge to recalibrate the confidence of the genotypes, not
just calculating a sample’s genotype likelihoods only by its reads. The tool CalculateGenotypePosteriors
was applied in this step. Then, we used VariantFiltration to mark out the low Genotype Quality (GQ)
sites whose GQ values were lower than 20 and read depths were lower than 10. Lastly, only the sites
with all trio numbers ≥ GQ 20 were defined as high confidence de novo variants in the final call set.
Protein-coding LoF variants in novel CMP genes
To identify novel putative CMP genes beyond the 133 established CMP genes, we searched for
predicted deleterious heterozygous and homozygous LoF variants (i.e. frameshift, nonsense, stopgain,
stoploss, and splicing variants) in the remainder of the exome among CMP cases that did harbor a
pathogenic protein-coding or high-risk regulatory variant in a CMP gene. LoF variants were identified
using LOFTEE (https://github.com/konradjk/loftee)32,33. All LoF variants were required to be predicted
as high impact by VEP100, observed at an allele frequency <0.01% in the gnomAD reference population,
observed in <1% of unrelated families in the cohort, and affect genes that are expressed in the human
heart . Variants were further prioritized if they were in a highly constrained gene (gnomAD pLI>0.9)
and/or were important in heart function. Gene tissue expression level categories were obtained from the
Human Protein Atlas (http://www.proteinatlas.org)35.
SNVs and CNVs in regulatory elements of CMP genes
A map was generated of the regulatory regions of the human genome, primarily promoters and proximal
and distal enhancers, active in the developing and adult human heart based on experimental evidence
and data from the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project47, FANTOM project46, Roadmap
epigenomics49 and published data by Dickel et al48. The promoter regions of all CMP genes not included
by Dickel et al were defined as 1.5kb upstream and 1.25kb downstream of the transcription start site
(TSS). The TSS for canonical transcripts and when necessary, cardiac transcripts in build 37 of the
human genome (hg19) were downloaded from the Ensembl Genome Browser (www.ensembl.org -
accessed October 2017). To identify risk SNVs within defined regulatory regions of CMP genes, an
automated custom non-coding variant prioritization pipeline was developed and implemented. Briefly,
variants within defined regulatory regions were annotated using Ensembl’s Variant Effect Predictor
(VEP v90)100. Variants overlapping known Ensembl’s regulatory features were compared with those
identified in WGS data in reference populations in gnomAD (n=141,456). Regulatory regions are listed
in Supplementary Table 9. Functional impact of rare regulatory variants was assessed based on TFBS
creation or disruption scores. The scores for TFBS disruption (motif loss) and TFBS creation (motif
gain) were based on combined prediction scores from four different tools - RegulomeDB50,
motifbreakR51, DeepSEA52, and Fathmm-MKL105. Variants were deemed Tier 1 and were scored as
damaging by at least 3 of 4 prediction tools (Tier 1). Regulatory variants were further prioritized if they
occurred within gene elusive CMP cases, were associated with a gene having an OR >1.3 compared to
the ICGC control cohort, and were in a region that is active in the human LV. Intergenic and intronic
CNVs as well as indels <1kb overlapping promoter and enhancers active in the developing and adult
human heart as defined by Dickel et al48 were also prioritized.
Case control regulatory variant burden analysis
WGS variant calls were obtained from 1326 patients without heart disease enrolled in the International
Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)54. The WGS samples were generated from normal tissue, with 998
                                                                      12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
consisting of blood, 224 solid tissue from a site distal to the primary tumor, 76 adjacent solid tissue, and
28 other tissues. Patients included 579 females and 747 males; diagnoses included 286 pancreatic
cancers, 221 brain cancers, 178 prostate cancers, 123 breast cancers, 98 esophageal cancers, 82 liver
cancers, 74 renal cancers, 70 skin cancers, 68 ovarian cancers, 64 bone cancers, 37 gastric cancers, 13
oral cancers, and 12 biliary tract cancers. Data were obtained from the ICGC Data Portal Pan-Cancer
Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) section. Samples were aligned to hs37d5 (GRCh37), and
germline variant calls were made using the DKFZ/EMBL variant call pipeline. The “NORMAL” sample
calls were extracted and filtered in a comparable way to the discovery cohort: only variants with a
‘PASS’ flag covered by at least 10 reads (DP/DPI ≥10) were used for downstream analysis. Variant calls
were converted to hg19 using Picard LiftoverVcf (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/).
To compare variant burden between cases and controls for Tier 1 variants in regulatory elements of
CMP genes, variant calls were required to have an allele frequency ≤0.01% in gnomAD. Variants
observed in ≥1% of samples in the study cohort were excluded from burden testing to reduce false-
positive variant calls. For each comparison (gene, pathway, or the entire regulome), ORs were calculated
as the frequency of cases versus controls harboring at least one variant. P-values were calculated using a
two-sided Fisher’s exact test. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.2 was applied after removing
tests where no variants were observed in the combined case and control samples. To reduce bias in these
calculations and avoid “zero cells” in the contingency tables, 0.5 was added to each observed frequency
(Haldane-Anscombe correction). All statistical analyses were done using R statistical software version
3.5.1.
Replication cohort analysis
Regulatory variant burden analysis was extended to an independent cohort of 1266 CMP cases, using
samples from the 100,000 Genomes Project available to us through the Genomics England Clinical
Interpretation Partnership from version 8 of the main programme106. All cases were required to be
probands with WGS data available and have at least one normalized specific disease term matching
"cardiomyopathy". Individuals with additional syndromic Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms
were excluded. The cohort included 745 HCM, 355 DCM, 43 LVNC, and 119 AVC subtypes; 22% were
less than 21 years old at the time of diagnosis; 62% were male, 82% were of European ancestry. Where
possible, short variant calls (SNVs and indels) were obtained after alignment to the reference genome
hg38, otherwise GRCh37 variant calls were used. Variants were filtered to require a 'PASS' flag and to
have a minimum total read depth (DP/DPI) of 10. hg38 and GRCh37 variant calls were converted to
hg19 using Picard LiftoverVcf (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/). Variant burden analysis in the
cases from the 100,000 Genome Project was performed as previously described by comparing with the
ICGC control cohort.
Pathway enrichment analysis
Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using g:Profiler with default parameters
(https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler)107. The protein-coding gene set was ranked according to the total number
of pathogenic SNVs, indels, and CNVs observed in our cohort. The regulatory gene set was ranked
according to the total number of prioritized regulatory variants observed among gene-elusive cases.
Adjusted p-values were calculated using a Bonferroni correction, and only pathways with an adjusted p-
value <0.05 were considered significant.
Subgroup analyses
To compare variant burden in protein-coding CMP genes or pathways between CMP subtypes, a series
of 2×2 contingency tables were constructed whereby each subtype was tested against all others for each
                                                                      13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
gene or pathway. A case was considered positive if it harbored at least one pathogenic variant (SNV,
indel, and/or CNV), otherwise it was considered negative. Similarly, tests for associations with clinical
outcome utilized 2×2 contingency tables and a case was considered positive if it harbored at least one
variant of interest. Equivalently, burden tests for multiple variants of any type labeled ‘positive’ cases as
those that harbor two or more of any variants for the gene or pathway being tested. P-values were
calculated using a two-sided Fisher’s exact test. To reduce bias in the OR calculations and avoid “zero
cells” in the contingency tables, 0.5 was added to each observed frequency (Haldane-Anscombe
correction). A false discovery rate (FDR) was applied after removing tests where no variants were
observed in any samples for each test set (genes or pathways). To identify enrichment for
sarcomeric/cytoskeletal genes among all prioritized regulatory variants, a two-sided binomial test was
used. Each variant was considered a ‘success’ if the variant was associated with a sarcomeric gene and
was considered a ‘failure’ if the variant was associated with a different gene category. The prior
probability of ‘success’ was set at 8/133 i.e. equal to the fraction of sarcomeric genes among the total set
of known CMP genes. All statistical analyses were done using R statistical software version 3.5.1.
Myocardial gene and protein expression
LV myocardium was obtained from CMP patients who had consented to biobanking from leftover tissue
at the time of cardiac surgery or cardiac transplantation and was immediately snap frozen in the
operating room and stored in liquid nitrogen.
RNA sequencing (RNAseq): To measure myocardial gene expression, RNAseq was performed using
Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform at TCAG in 35 LV samples. Total RNA was extracted from LV
myocardial samples using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN, Canada). The generated raw sequence data
was filtered according to the procedures described previously108. The filtered sequence reads were
aligned to the human genome browser UCSC hg19, using Tophat v.2.0.11, and processed to extract raw
read counts for genes using htseq-count v.0.6.1p2. Sequencing data was mapped to the human
transcriptome using HISAT2 spliced aligner109, and gene expression level was quantified using
StringTie110. Reads per kilobase of transcript per million generated were normalized for the size of each
library, and normalized for the length of the transcripts. Normalized RNAseq data for the genes analyzed
in this study are available in Supplementary Table 10. Expression analysis was performed to determine
fold-difference in mRNA expression in the variant-positive patient compared to the average values in
the remaining cohort (i.e. patients without the candidate SNV or CNV on WGS)111.
qRT-PCR: For additional confirmation of a difference in the mRNA expression level of the gene
harboring the variant compared to the wild type sequences, we determined the relative mRNA
expression using qRT-PCR112. Total RNA was extracted from patient LV myocardium using mirVana™
PARIS™ RNA and native protein purification Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration and purity of the RNA was assessed using a Nanodrop
2000c (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). RNA with an A260/280 ratio of 2.0±0.05 was
further evaluated for its integrity using a TapeStation 4200 (Agilent, Santa Clara, California, USA).
RNA samples with RNA Integrity number above 5 and rRNA ratio of 1.7-2.0 were used to synthesize
complementary DNA (cDNA) using SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
California, USA). Specific oligonucleotide primers for each variant (Supplementary Table 11) were
designed by primer3-NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/primer-blast/), and synthesised by
Integrated DNA technologies (Coralville, Iowa, USA). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH, human) was used as a housekeeping gene for normalization. The qRT-PCR was performed in
a ViiA7 qPCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) using PowerUp SYBRTM
Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA). The total volume of the PCR
                                                                      14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
reaction was 10 μl and PCR conditions consisted of a hold stage of 50°C for 2 min, then 95°C for 2 min
followed by 40 cycles of 15 sec at 95°C and 15 sec at 55-60°C (Primer Tm dependent) and 72°C for 1
min. The relative quantification of mRNA was performed using the 2−ΔΔCt method113. mRNA expression
of target genes in the LV myocardium of the patient harboring the variant was compared to wild-type
tissues derived from other individuals, including an autopsy sample from an individual without cardiac
disease as well as CMP patients that did not harbour any known pathogenic coding or regulatory
variants. Experiments were performed three independent times and each experiment included 3 technical
replicates. Differences between patients with and patients without the variant were analyzed using the
Student’s unpaired t test and considered significant at p<0.05.
Western blot: To determine if change in mRNA expression was associated with a change in protein
expression, Western blots were performed to assess myocardial protein expression114,115. Frozen tissues
were homogenized in liquid nitrogen and lysed in radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer and
a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Samples were mixed with loading buffer,
heated at 90°C for 5 min, separated using SDS-blot 4-12% Bis-Tris plus (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
California, USA) and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. After blocking the membrane with 5%
non-fat dry milk in phosphate buffer saline (PBS; pH:7.4), the membrane was incubated with either
FKTN rabbit monoclonal antibody (ab131280; abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit polyclonal TGFβ3
antibody (ab15537, abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit PRKAG2 Polyclonal antibody (MBS9134285,
MyBiosource, San Diego, California, USA) or NRAP polyclonal antibody (PAS-88772; Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, California, USA) in blocking buffer for 2 hour (h) at room temperature (Supplementary
Table 12). The reference gene GAPDH (ab8245, abcam, Cambridge, UK) was used as a loading control.
After extensive washing of the membrane with PBS/Tween-20, the goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP and goat
anti-mouse IgG-HRP (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California,) were used as secondary antibodies at a dilution
1:2000 for 1 h at room temperature. Reactive bands were visualized by ChemiDoc MP imaging system
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA). Protein expression in the LV myocardium of the patient
harboring the variant was compared to control samples of other CMP patients who did not harbor this
variant. The results were quantified using ImageJ software (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) and relative
protein abundance of the immunoblot signal from each target protein was normalized to average
abundance of the immunoblot signal of control samples. Statistical analyses were performed using the
Student’s unpaired t test on data from 2 independent experiments. Differences were considered
statistically significant at p<0.05.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC): Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) LV tissue from a CMP
patient with a LARGE1 promoter variant and controls without LARGE1 variants were used for IHC
analysis using standard techniques116. FFPE tissue blocks were sectioned at 4 μm, dewaxed in xylene,
dehydrated with a serial dilution of ethanol solution and washed with PBS. Antigen retrieval
was performed in target retrieval solution (Dako, Burlington, ON, Canada) for 45 min followed by
blocking of tissues in 3% hydrogen peroxidase (H2O2) for 10 minutes. After washing with PBS, tissue
sections were incubated for 30 min at room temperature with primary antibody for anti-LARGE1 (PA5-
78393, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) followed by incubation of sections with
biotinylated secondary antibody for another 30 min (Supplementary Table 12). Immunolabeling was
detected using EnVision+ System-HRP DAB kits (Dako, Burlington, ON, Canada). Sections were
examined and imaged with a light microscope. Cell nuclei were counterstained with Myer’s
Hematoxylin Histological Staining Reagent (Dako, Burlington, ON, Canada). The photographs were
analyzed with automated image analysis software (Image J, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland). The number of LARGE1 positive cells was averaged in 10 fields per section and repeated in
3 replicates. Staining was compared between the individual harboring the LARGE1 variant and the
                                                                      15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
controls. Student’s unpaired t-test was used to determine differences between groups. A p-value of <0.05
was considered significant.
Reporter assays in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes
Generation of human iPSC-cardiomyocytes: Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived from
peripheral blood lymphocytes of a healthy adult donor (PGP17), were differentiated into cardiomyocytes
(CMs) using a STEMdiff Cardiomyocyte Differentiation Kit. The PGP17_11 iPSC line is devoid of any
known cardiac disease variants and the protocol for differentiation into cardiomyocytes has been
previously described114. The beating of differentiated iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes was observed at day
8 post differentiation. Cells were re-seeded at day 16 into 12-well plates for transient transfection.
Cardiomyocytes were co-transfected with luciferase constructs at day 21. Transfected cells were
harvested 48 h after transfection and firefly and renilla luciferase activity was measured using the Dual-
Luciferase® Reporter Assay System.
Luciferase reporter assay: For functional validation of variant effect on gene transcription, Dual-
Luciferase® Reporter Assay System (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) was used to test and
compare the transcription activity of a luciferase reporter gene under the effect of the variant promoter
or enhancer+promoter sequence from the patient, or genome reference sequence of each regulatory
region as a wild-type control67,68. In order to generate the luciferase plasmids harboring the sequence of
regulatory element of the predicted variants and wild-type as a control, the nucleotide sequences of 1.5-
Kb of promoter region of BRAF, DSP, DTNA, FKRP, FKTN and LARGE1, and 2-Kb of-
enhancer/promoter region of TGFB3, containing the strongest transcriptional activation region, were
commercially synthesized (Supplementary Table 13) (Synbio Technologies, Monmouth Junction, NJ,
USA). The commercial plasmids encoding the respective wild-type, enhancer or promoter variant
sequences were digested with appropriate restriction enzymes and cloned separately into multiple
cloning sites of Firefly Luciferase basic vectors (pGL4.10-luc2; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA).
Human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes were seeded in 12-well plates, and co-transfected with 2 µg firefly
luciferase vectors (pGL4.10-luc2; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) harboring regulatory sequences
of wild type, BRAF, DSP, DTNA, FKRP, FKTN and LARGE1 or TGFB3 variants and 40 ng of Renilla
Luciferase control reporter vectors (pRL-TK Vector; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) for
normalization of transfection conditions. At 48 h post-transfection, luminescence was detected with
Dual-Luciferase® Reporter (DLR™) assay system. The experiment was performed in three independent
replicates and each sample was also tested in triplicate in each experiment. Firefly luciferase was
measured, and followed by Renilla luciferase, in the same well. The normalizing activity of the
experimental reporter was calculated by dividing the firefly luciferase signal by the internal renilla
luciferase signal. Promoter-driven control firefly luciferase vector (pGL4.13-luc2/SV40; Promega,
Madison, WI, USA) was used as a reference. An unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to
compare if the difference between luciferase activity of the luciferase reporter gene under the effect of
the regulatory variant sequence and reference sequence of each regulatory region as a wild-type control.
The significance threshold was set at p<0.05.
Massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA): Oligonucleotides of 135 bp with 11-bp barcodes were
designed and synthesized by TwistBioscience (USA). Variants were centered within the 135 bp oligo.
The full list of variants tested can be found in Supplementary Table 6. To control for technical
variation and to assess biological relevance, each tested allele was represented a minimum of 25 times,
each with a unique barcode. The oligonucleotide library contained 2700 oligos for our genomic variants,
100 oligonucleotides for positive controls, and 1500 oligonucleotides for negative controls i.e.
                                                                      16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
scrambled sequences. These oligonucleotides were part of an oligonucleotide library that included an
additional 234,500 sequences as part of a larger study. The cloning strategy of the oligonucleotide
library and selection of positive negative controls (300 random sequences, each with 5 barcodes) was
performed according to Mattioli et. al23. The oligonucleotide library was transfected into five biological
replicates of PGP17 iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes with over 80% transfection efficiency across all
replicates, using Lipofectamine Stem Transfection Reagent (STEM00015 Thermo Fisher, Waltham,
Massachusetts, USA) (Supplementary Figure 3b). 48 hours post transfection, total RNA was harvested
and DNA contamination was removed using DNase I (18047019, Thermo Fisher, Waltham,
Massachusetts, USA). RNA samples with RNA Integrity number >7 were used to synthesize cDNA
using SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA). cDNA was used
for library synthesis if it lacked plasmid contamination as determined by qRT-PCR performed on a
ViiA7 qPCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) using PowerUp SYBRTM
Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) (Supplementary Figure 3c).
Tag-seq libraries were prepared as previously described23, and sequenced with single-end 50 bp reads on
the HiSeq2500 platform (TCAG, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto). Data were analyzed using
MPRAAnalyze software 23,117 using random oligonucleotide sequences as null distribution. P values
were calculated using a likelihood ratio test with MPRAAnalyze and a FDR<0.05 was considered
significant.
CRISPR-Cas9 editing to evaluate novel gene function in zebrafish embryos
All zebrafish embryo studies were performed at the SickKids Genetics and Disease Models Core
(Zebrafish Core), Toronto, and approved by the SickKids Animal Care Committee (Protocol #401951).
Guide RNA (gRNA) design, synthesis and microinjection: All gRNA sequences were adapted from45,
and are described in Supplementary Table 14. The primer sequences (Supplementary Table 15) were
synthesized by Integrated DNA technologies (IDT, Coralville, Iowa, USA) and used for sgRNA in vitro
synthesis, according to the earlier described protocol45. Microinjections were performed as described
previously45 with minor modifications. Briefly, for nrap gRNA1, 250 pg of each gRNA with 800 pg
Cas9 protein (Alt-R® S.p. Cas9 Nuclease V3, cat #1081058, IDT, Coralville, Iowa, USA) were co-
injected into wild-type embryos at one cell stage. For the co-injection of 8 gRNAs of fhod3a+b,
gRNA1-gRNA4, 125 pg of each gRNA was injected while the amount of Cas9 protein remained
unchanged. The injected embryos were kept in 0.003% Phenylthiourea (PTU) solution and incubated in
a dark incubator at 28.5 °C for 3 days. All phenotypic analysis, imaging, DNA extraction and
sequencing were performed at 3-days post fertilization (dpf).
DNA extraction, PCR and sequence analysis: Crude DNA was extracted from whole zebrafish larvae
using 1X-PCR buffer (10 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris, PH 8.0; 1.5 mM MgCl2) containing 1 mg/ml
proteinase K (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA ). The mixture was incubated at 55 °C
for 50 min and then 98 °C for 10 min to deactivate proteinase K. To sequence each gRNA region, PCR
was performed using Taq DNA polymerase (Bio basic, Markham, ON, Canada). The 25 μl reaction
mixture contained 1X-PCR reaction buffer, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTP, 0.2 mM of each forward and
reverse primers, 0.75 U of Taq polymerase, and 1.5 μl of crude DNA (~200 ng). The primer pairs and
their corresponding annealing temperatures are summarized in Supplementary Table 15. The PCR
reactions were set up as follows: 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 20s, anneal
temperature for 1 min, 72°C for 1 min and the final elongation is 72 °C for 5 min. The PCR product was
purified using ExoSAP-IT (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) following the
manufacturer’s instructions and 100 ng of each PCR product was sent for sequencing to TCAG
                                                                      17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
(Toronto, ON, Canada) with sequencing primers described in Supplementary Table 15. The
sequencing results were analyzed using ICE Analysis (https://ice.synthego.com/#/) or Geneious 9.1.4.
qRT-PCR: At 3 dpf, pooled RNA samples were collected either from zebrafish larvae injected with
gRNAs of target genes or Cas9 only as a control using TRIzol™ Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
California, USA). First-strand cDNA was synthesized using high capacity cDNA reverse transcription
kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The
primers listed in Supplementary Table 16 were used to amplify two reference genes of β–actin and
GAPDH to normalize data. qRT-PCR assay was performed in a Roche LightCycler 96 machine using
PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA). The relative
expression level was calculated based on two technical repeats using 2- ΔΔCT method113.
Sequencing: DNA samples were extracted from whole zebrafish larvae at 3 dpf and submitted for Sanger
sequencing to TCAG (Toronto, ON, Canada) to confirm cutting efficiency in the exons targeted by nrap,
fhod3a, and fhod3b gRNA compared to Cas9 only as a control. ICE CRISPR analysis tool (Synthego,
Menlo Park, CA) was used for analysis of CRISPR edits in fhod3b.
Zebrafish cardiac phenotyping: Cardiac phenotyping of zebrafish embryos was performed at 3 dpf to
assess cardiac chamber morphology, size and function. For wild field microscope in vivo imaging, 3 dpf
zebrafish larvae were anesthetized with 0.02% tricaine and mounted in 3% methylcellulose in 50 mm
glass-bottomed dishes. Video imaging was done with the Zeiss AXIO Zoom V16 Microscope using a
PlanNeoFluar Z 1X/0.25 FWD 56mm objective lens under 112x magnification. The Movie Recorder
function under Zen pro program was used and approximately 100 frames were captured for each video.
All videos were exported at 17 frames per second for further analysis. Images were captured with a
Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope under the Nikon A1 plus confocal imaging system using NIS-Elements
program. Atrial area was measured at end-systole, and ventricular area was measured at end-systole and
end-diastole with ventricular ejection fraction defined as (end-diastolic area – ventricular systolic area) /
ventricular end-systolic area x 100 using ImageJ (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). Atrial and ventricular sizes
and ventricular ejection fraction were compared using a two-tailed Student’s unpaired t-test to measure
significant differences between mutants (nrap and fhod3) and controls (Cas9 and wild-type). Differences
were considered statistically significant at P<0.05.
Data availability: Sequencing data are currently being deposited in the EGA European Genome-
Phenome Archive and will be available for download upon approval by the Data Access Committee.
Additional data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the supplementary information
files, and additional raw data used for figures and results are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request. All computational tools used in this study are available as commercial or open-
source software.
                                                                      18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the Labatt Family Heart Centre Biobank at the Hospital for Sick Children for access to
DNA samples for whole genome sequencing, and The Centre for Applied Genomics at the Hospital for
Sick Children for performing sequencing. We thank Xiucheng Cui and Emanuela Pannia for performing
the zebrafish experiments at the SickKids Zebrafish Genetics and Disease Models Core (CRISPR-Cas9
and gRNA syntheses, zebrafish embryo microinjections, gRNA PCR validation, qRT-PCR, cardiac
imaging). This research was made possible through access to the data and findings generated by the
100,000 Genomes Project. The 100,000 Genomes Project uses data provided by patients and collected
by the National Health Service as part of their care and support. We thank members of the
ICGC/PCAWG working groups for generating the variant calls used in our case-control burden
analyses.
FUNDING
This work was funded by the Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research (SM and JE). SM holds the Heart
and Stroke Foundation of Canada / Robert M Freedom Chair in Cardiovascular Science. SWS holds the
GlaxoSmithKline Endowed Chair in Genome Sciences at the Hospital for Sick Children and the
University of Toronto. PGM holds a Canada Research Chair Tier 2 in Non-coding Disease Mechanisms.
PGM acknowledges the support of the Government of Canada’s New Frontiers in Research Fund
(NFRF), [NFRFE-2018-01305]. EO holds the Bitove Family Professorship of Adult Congenital Heart
Disease. MM holds a Ramon y Cajal grant from the Spanish Ministery of Science and Innovation (RYC-
2017-22249). WO is supported by funding from Fundació La Marató (321/C/2019). JB is funded by a
Frans Van de Werf fellowship for clinical cardiovascular research, and by a senior clinical investigator
fellowship of the FWO Flanders. KM was a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellow
under grant no. DGE1144152 during the majority of the project. The 100,000 Genomes Project is
managed by Genomics England Limited (a wholly owned company of the Department of Health and
Social Care). The 100,000 Genomes Project is funded by the National Institute for Health Research and
NHS England. The Wellcome Trust, Cancer Research UK and the Medical Research Council have also
funded research infrastructure.
CONSORTIA
Genomics England Research Consortium
Ambrose, J. C.1; Arumugam, P.1; Baple, E. L.1; Bleda, M.1; Boardman-Pretty, F.1,2; Boissiere, J. M.1;
Boustred, C. R.1; Brittain, H.1; Caulfield, M. J.1,2; Chan, G. C.1; Craig, C. E. H.1; Daugherty, L. C.1; de
Burca, A.1; Devereau, A.1; Elgar, G.1,2; Foulger, R. E.1; Fowler, T1.; Furió-Tarí, P.1; Giess A.1; Hackett,
J. M.1; Halai, D.1; Hamblin, A.1; Henderson, S.1,2; Holman, J. E.1; Hubbard, T. J. P.1; Ibáñez, K.1,2;
Jackson, R.1; Jones, L. J.1,2; Kasperaviciute, D.1,2; Kayikci, M.1; Kousathanas, A.1; Lahnstein, L.1;
Lawson, K.1; Leigh, S. E. A.1; Leong, I. U. S.1; Lopez, F. J.1; Maleady-Crowe, F.1; Mason, J.1;
McDonagh, E. M.1,2; Moutsianas, L.1,2; Mueller, M.1,2; Murugaesu, N.1; Need, A. C.1,2; Odhams, C. A.1;
Orioli A.1; Patch, C.1,2; Perez-Gil, D.1; Pereira, M. B.1; Polychronopoulos, D.1; Pullinger, J.1; Rahim,
T.1; Rendon, A.1; Riesgo-Ferreiro, P.1; Rogers, T.1; Ryten, M.1; Savage, K.1; Sawant, K.1; Scott, R. H.1;
Siddiq, A.1; Sieghart, A.1; Smedley, D.1,2; Smith, K. R.1,2; Smith, S. C.1; Sosinsky, A.1,2; Spooner, W.1;
Stevens, H. E.1; Stuckey, A.1; Sultana, R.1; Tanguy M.1; Thomas, E. R. A.1,2; Thompson, S. R.1;
Tregidgo, C.1; Tucci, A.1,2; Walsh, E.1; Watters, S. A.1; Welland, M. J.1; Williams, E.1; Witkowska,
K.1,2; Wood, S. M.1,2; Zarowiecki, M.1
1.
   Genomics England, London, UK
2.
   William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
                                                                      19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
RL, AS, JE, SM conceptualized and designed the work; RL, AS, OA, JB, TL, RY, FM, RRN, AM, QY,
GM, MCSY, WWL, BT, GERC, JL, EO, LB, JS, TM, JE, SWS, SM acquired, analyzed or interpreted
the data; RL, OA, TL, RY, MCSY, WWL, BT performed the bioinformatics analysis; KM, KD, WO,
MM, PGM designed, executed and analyzed the MPRA dataset; RL, AS, SM drafted the original
manuscript; RL, AS, PGM, JE, SWS, SM substantively revised it; and all authors reviewed and
approved the final manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
SWS is a scientific consultant to Population Bio, Deep Genomics Scientific Advisory Board, and his
research patents held at the Hospital for Sick Children are licensed to Lineagen, and Athena Diagnostics.
The other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
                                                                      20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
REFERENCES
1. Maron, B. J., Rowin, E. J. & Maron, M. S. Global Burden of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. JACC
      Heart Fail. 6, 376–378 (2018).
2. Semsarian, C., Ingles, J., Maron, M. S. & Maron, B. J. New perspectives on the prevalence of
      hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 65, 1249–1254 (2015).
3. Lipshultz Steven E. et al. Cardiomyopathy in Children: Classification and Diagnosis: A Scientific
      Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation 140, e9–e68 (2019).
4. Watkins,          H.,         Ashrafian,           H.       &       Redwood,         C.         Inherited      Cardiomyopathies.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra0902923                           https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMra0902923
      (2011) doi:10.1056/NEJMra0902923.
5. Jacoby, D. & McKenna, W. J. Genetics of inherited cardiomyopathy. Eur. Heart J. 33, 296–304
      (2012).
6. Lafreniere-Roula, M. et al. Family screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Is it time to change
      practice guidelines? Eur. Heart J. 40, 3672–3681 (2019).
7. A, M. et al. A Validated Model for Sudden Cardiac Death Risk Prediction in Pediatric Hypertrophic
      Cardiomyopathy. Circulation vol. 142 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32418493/ (2020).
8. Mathew, J. et al. Utility of genetics for risk stratification in pediatric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
      Clin. Genet. 93, 310–319 (2018).
9. Alfares, A. A. et al. Results of clinical genetic testing of 2,912 probands with hypertrophic
      cardiomyopathy: expanded panels offer limited additional sensitivity. Genet. Med. Off. J. Am. Coll.
      Med. Genet. 17, 880–888 (2015).
10. Ouellette, A. C. et al. Clinical genetic testing in pediatric cardiomyopathy: Is bigger better? Clin.
      Genet. 93, 33–40 (2018).
11. Mak, T. S. H. et al. Coverage and diagnostic yield of Whole Exome Sequencing for the Evaluation
      of Cases with Dilated and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. Sci. Rep. 8, 10846 (2018).
12. Siepel, A. et al. Evolutionarily conserved elements in vertebrate, insect, worm, and yeast genomes.
      Genome Res. 15, 1034–1050 (2005).
13. Brittain, H. K., Scott, R. & Thomas, E. The rise of the genome and personalised medicine. Clin.
      Med. Lond. Engl. 17, 545–551 (2017).
14. Lionel, A. C. et al. Improved diagnostic yield compared with targeted gene sequencing panels
      suggests a role for whole-genome sequencing as a first-tier genetic test. Genet. Med. Off. J. Am.
      Coll. Med. Genet. 20, 435–443 (2018).
15. Minoche, A. E. et al. Genome sequencing as a first-line genetic test in familial dilated
      cardiomyopathy. Genet. Med. Off. J. Am. Coll. Med. Genet. 21, 650–662 (2019).
16. Michaelson, J. J. et al. Whole-genome sequencing in autism identifies hot spots for de novo
      germline mutation. Cell 151, 1431–1442 (2012).
17. Yuen, R. K. C. et al. Genome-wide characteristics of de novo mutations in autism. NPJ Genomic
      Med. 1, 160271–1602710 (2016).
18. C Yuen, R. K. et al. Whole genome sequencing resource identifies 18 new candidate genes for
      autism spectrum disorder. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 602–611 (2017).
19. Brandler, W. M. et al. Paternally inherited cis-regulatory structural variants are associated with
      autism. Science 360, 327–331 (2018).
20. Trost, B. et al. Genome-wide detection of tandem DNA repeats that are expanded in autism. Nature
      (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2579-z.
21. Richter, F. et al. Genomic analyses implicate noncoding de novo variants in congenital heart
      disease. Nat. Genet. 52, 769–777 (2020).
                                                                      21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
22. Melnikov, A. et al. Systematic dissection and optimization of inducible enhancers in human cells
     using a massively parallel reporter assay. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 271–277 (2012).
23. Mattioli, K. et al. High-throughput functional analysis of lncRNA core promoters elucidates rules
     governing tissue specificity. Genome Res. 29, 344–355 (2019).
24. Richards, S. et al. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint
     consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the
     Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. Off. J. Am. Coll. Med. Genet. 17, 405–424
     (2015).
25. Choi, Y., Sims, G. E., Murphy, S., Miller, J. R. & Chan, A. P. Predicting the functional effect of
     amino acid substitutions and indels. PloS One 7, e46688 (2012).
26. Dong, C. et al. Comparison and integration of deleteriousness prediction methods for
     nonsynonymous SNVs in whole exome sequencing studies. Hum. Mol. Genet. 24, 2125–2137
     (2015).
27. Kircher, M. et al. A general framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic
     variants. Nat. Genet. 46, 310–315 (2014).
28. Jiang, Y. et al. Detection of clinically relevant genetic variants in autism spectrum disorder by
     whole-genome sequencing. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93, 249–263 (2013).
29. Trost, B. et al. A Comprehensive Workflow for Read Depth-Based Identification of Copy-Number
     Variation from Whole-Genome Sequence Data. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 102, 142–155 (2018).
30. Zarrei, M., MacDonald, J. R., Merico, D. & Scherer, S. W. A copy number variation map of the
     human genome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 172–183 (2015).
31. Gross, A. M. et al. Copy-number variants in clinical genome sequencing: deployment and
     interpretation for rare and undiagnosed disease. Genet. Med. 21, 1121–1130 (2019).
32. Cassa, C. A. et al. Estimating the selective effects of heterozygous protein-truncating variants from
     human exome data. Nat. Genet. 49, 806–810 (2017).
33. Karczewski, K. J. et al. The mutational constraint spectrum quantified from variation in 141,456
     humans. Nature 581, 434–443 (2020).
34. Kim, M.-S. et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature 509, 575–581 (2014).
35. Uhlén, M. et al. Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 347, 1260419
     (2015).
36. Luo, G. et al. Complete cDNA sequence and tissue localization of N-RAP, a novel nebulin-related
     protein of striated muscle. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 38, 75–90 (1997).
37. Zhang, J. Q. et al. Ultrastructural and biochemical localization of N-RAP at the interface between
     myofibrils and intercalated disks in the mouse heart. Biochemistry 40, 14898–14906 (2001).
38. Lu, S. et al. Cardiac-specific NRAP overexpression causes right ventricular dysfunction in mice.
     Exp. Cell Res. 317, 1226–1237 (2011).
39. Truszkowska, G. T. et al. Homozygous truncating mutation in NRAP gene identified by whole
     exome sequencing in a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy. Sci. Rep. 7, 3362 (2017).
40. Matsuyama, S. et al. Interaction between cardiac myosin-binding protein C and formin Fhod3.
     Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E4386–E4395 (2018).
41. Wooten, E. C. et al. Formin homology 2 domain containing 3 variants associated with hypertrophic
     cardiomyopathy. Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet. 6, 10–18 (2013).
42. Arimura, T. et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy-associated FHOD3 variant impairs the ability to induce
     activation of transcription factor serum response factor. Circ. J. Off. J. Jpn. Circ. Soc. 77, 2990–
     2996 (2013).
43. Esslinger, U. et al. Exome-wide association study reveals novel susceptibility genes to sporadic
     dilated cardiomyopathy. PloS One 12, e0172995 (2017).
                                                                      22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
44. Huang, C.-J., Tu, C.-T., Hsiao, C.-D., Hsieh, F.-J. & Tsai, H.-J. Germ-line transmission of a
     myocardium-specific GFP transgene reveals critical regulatory elements in the cardiac myosin light
     chain 2 promoter of zebrafish. Dev. Dyn. Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Anat. 228, 30–40 (2003).
45. Wu, R. S. et al. A Rapid Method for Directed Gene Knockout for Screening in G0 Zebrafish. Dev.
     Cell 46, 112-125.e4 (2018).
46. Andersson, R. et al. An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues. Nature 507,
     455–461 (2014).
47. ENCODE Project Consortium. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human
     genome. Nature 489, 57–74 (2012).
48. Dickel, D. E. et al. Genome-wide compendium and functional assessment of in vivo heart
     enhancers. Nat. Commun. 7, 12923 (2016).
49. Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium et al. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes.
     Nature 518, 317–330 (2015).
50. Boyle, A. P. et al. Annotation of functional variation in personal genomes using RegulomeDB.
     Genome Res. 22, 1790–1797 (2012).
51. Coetzee, S. G., Coetzee, G. A. & Hazelett, D. J. motifbreakR: an R/Bioconductor package for
     predicting variant effects at transcription factor binding sites. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 31, 3847–
     3849 (2015).
52. Shihab, H. A. et al. An integrative approach to predicting the functional effects of non-coding and
     coding sequence variation. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 31, 1536–1543 (2015).
53. Zhou, J. & Troyanskaya, O. G. Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning-based
     sequence model. Nat. Methods 12, 931–934 (2015).
54. International Cancer Genome Consortium et al. International network of cancer genome projects.
     Nature 464, 993–998 (2010).
55. Ashburner, M. et al. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
     Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000).
56. The Gene Ontology Consortium. The Gene Ontology Resource: 20 years and still GOing strong.
     Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D330–D338 (2019).
57. Jassal, B. et al. The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D498–D503 (2020).
58. Schneider, T. D. & Stephens, R. M. Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus sequences.
     Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 6097–6100 (1990).
59. Valdés-Mas, R. et al. Mutations in filamin C cause a new form of familial hypertrophic
     cardiomyopathy. Nat. Commun. 5, 5326 (2014).
60. Olson, T. M. et al. Metavinculin mutations alter actin interaction in dilated cardiomyopathy.
     Circulation 105, 431–437 (2002).
61. Michele, D. E., Kabaeva, Z., Davis, S. L., Weiss, R. M. & Campbell, K. P. Dystroglycan matrix
     receptor function in cardiac myocytes is important for limiting activity-induced myocardial
     damage. Circ. Res. 105, 984–993 (2009).
62. Johnson, E. K. et al. Proteomic analysis reveals new cardiac-specific dystrophin-associated
     proteins. PloS One 7, e43515 (2012).
63. Ujihara, Y. et al. Elimination of fukutin reveals cellular and molecular pathomechanisms in
     muscular dystrophy-associated heart failure. Nat. Commun. 10, 5754 (2019).
64. Arimura, T. et al. Mutational analysis of fukutin gene in dilated cardiomyopathy and hypertrophic
     cardiomyopathy. Circ. J. Off. J. Jpn. Circ. Soc. 73, 158–161 (2009).
65. Murakami, T. et al. Fukutin gene mutations cause dilated cardiomyopathy with minimal muscle
     weakness. Ann. Neurol. 60, 597–602 (2006).
66. James, C. A., Syrris, P., van Tintelen, J. P. & Calkins, H. The role of genetics in cardiovascular
     disease: arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. Eur. Heart J. 41, 1393–1400 (2020).
                                                                      23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
67. Madan, N. et al. Functionalization of CD36 cardiovascular disease and expression associated
     variants by interdisciplinary high throughput analysis. PLoS Genet. 15, e1008287 (2019).
68. Kapoor, A. et al. Multiple SCN5A variant enhancers modulate its cardiac gene expression and the
     QT interval. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116, 10636–10645 (2019).
69. Dobaczewski, M., Chen, W. & Frangogiannis, N. G. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β
     signaling in cardiac remodeling. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 51, 600–606 (2011).
70. Beffagna, G. et al. Regulatory mutations in transforming growth factor-beta3 gene cause
     arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 1. Cardiovasc. Res. 65, 366–373 (2005).
71. Landstrom, A. P. et al. Junctophilin-2 expression silencing causes cardiocyte hypertrophy and
     abnormal intracellular calcium-handling. Circ. Heart Fail. 4, 214–223 (2011).
72. Li, J. et al. Loss of αT-catenin alters the hybrid adhering junctions in the heart and leads to dilated
     cardiomyopathy and ventricular arrhythmia following acute ischemia. J. Cell Sci. 125, 1058–1067
     (2012).
73. Aherrahrou, Z. et al. Knock-out of nexilin in mice leads to dilated cardiomyopathy and
     endomyocardial fibroelastosis. Basic Res. Cardiol. 111, 6 (2016).
74. Prins, K. W. et al. Colchicine Depolymerizes Microtubules, Increases Junctophilin-2, and Improves
     Right Ventricular Function in Experimental Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension. J. Am. Heart Assoc.
     6, (2017).
75. Inoue, F. & Ahituv, N. Decoding enhancers using massively parallel reporter assays. Genomics
     106, 159–164 (2015).
76. Vockley, C. M. et al. Massively parallel quantification of the regulatory effects of noncoding
     genetic variation in a human cohort. Genome Res. 25, 1206–1214 (2015).
77. Maricque, B. B., Chaudhari, H. G. & Cohen, B. A. A massively parallel reporter assay dissects the
     influence of chromatin structure on cis -regulatory activity. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 90–95 (2019).
78. Trauernicht, M., Martinez-Ara, M. & Steensel, B. van. Deciphering Gene Regulation Using
     Massively Parallel Reporter Assays. Trends Biochem. Sci. 45, 90–91 (2020).
79. Kelly Matthew & Semsarian Christopher. Multiple Mutations in Genetic Cardiovascular Disease.
     Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet. 2, 182–190 (2009).
80. Papaz, T. et al. Factors influencing participation in a population-based biorepository for childhood
     heart disease. Pediatrics 130, e1198-1205 (2012).
81. Papaz, T. et al. Return of genetic and genomic research findings: experience of a pediatric
     biorepository. BMC Med. Genomics 12, 173 (2019).
82. Elliott, P. et al. Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position statement from the European
     Society Of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur. Heart J. 29,
     270–276 (2008).
83. Maron, B. J. et al. Contemporary definitions and classification of the cardiomyopathies: an
     American Heart Association Scientific Statement from the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Heart
     Failure and Transplantation Committee; Quality of Care and Outcomes Research and Functional
     Genomics and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; and Council on
     Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation 113, 1807–1816 (2006).
84. Raczy, C. et al. Isaac: ultra-fast whole-genome secondary analysis on Illumina sequencing
     platforms. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 29, 2041–2043 (2013).
85. Pedersen, B. S. & Quinlan, A. R. Mosdepth: quick coverage calculation for genomes and exomes.
     Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 34, 867–868 (2018).
86. Cingolani, P. et al. A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide
     polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; iso-
     3. Fly (Austin) 6, 80–92 (2012).
                                                                      24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
87. Wang, K., Li, M. & Hakonarson, H. ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from
     high-throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, e164 (2010).
88. Danecek, P. et al. The variant call format and VCFtools. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 27, 2156–2158
     (2011).
89. Landrum, M. J. et al. ClinVar: public archive of interpretations of clinically relevant variants.
     Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D862-868 (2016).
90. Stenson, P. D. et al. The Human Gene Mutation Database: towards a comprehensive repository of
     inherited mutation data for medical research, genetic diagnosis and next-generation sequencing
     studies. Hum. Genet. 136, 665–677 (2017).
91. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium et al. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature
     526, 68–74 (2015).
92. Fu, W. et al. Analysis of 6,515 exomes reveals the recent origin of most human protein-coding
     variants. Nature 493, 216–220 (2013).
93. Lek, M. et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature 536, 285–291
     (2016).
94. Ng, P. C. & Henikoff, S. SIFT: Predicting amino acid changes that affect protein function. Nucleic
     Acids Res. 31, 3812–3814 (2003).
95. Adzhubei, I., Jordan, D. M. & Sunyaev, S. R. Predicting functional effect of human missense
     mutations using PolyPhen-2. Curr. Protoc. Hum. Genet. Chapter 7, Unit7.20 (2013).
96. Schwarz, J. M., Cooper, D. N., Schuelke, M. & Seelow, D. MutationTaster2: mutation prediction
     for the deep-sequencing age. Nat. Methods 11, 361–362 (2014).
97. Reva, B., Antipin, Y. & Sander, C. Predicting the functional impact of protein mutations:
     application to cancer genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, e118 (2011).
98. Hubisz, M. J., Pollard, K. S. & Siepel, A. PHAST and RPHAST: phylogenetic analysis with
     space/time models. Brief. Bioinform. 12, 41–51 (2011).
99. Davydov, E. V. et al. Identifying a high fraction of the human genome to be under selective
     constraint using GERP++. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1001025 (2010).
100. McLaren, W. et al. Deriving the consequences of genomic variants with the Ensembl API and SNP
     Effect Predictor. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 26, 2069–2070 (2010).
101. Li, Q. & Wang, K. InterVar: Clinical Interpretation of Genetic Variants by the 2015 ACMG-AMP
     Guidelines. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 100, 267–280 (2017).
102. Zhu, M. et al. Using ERDS to infer copy-number variants in high-coverage genomes. Am. J. Hum.
     Genet. 91, 408–421 (2012).
103. Abyzov, A., Urban, A. E., Snyder, M. & Gerstein, M. CNVnator: an approach to discover,
     genotype, and characterize typical and atypical CNVs from family and population genome
     sequencing. Genome Res. 21, 974–984 (2011).
104. Poplin, R. et al. Scaling accurate genetic variant discovery to tens of thousands of samples. bioRxiv
     201178 (2018) doi:10.1101/201178.
105. Shihab, H. A. et al. Ranking non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms based on disease
     concepts. Hum. Genomics 8, 11 (2014).
106. Caulfield, M. et al. The National Genomics Research and Healthcare Knowledgebase. (2019)
     doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.4530893.v5.
107. Raudvere, U. et al. g:Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and conversions of
     gene lists (2019 update). Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W191–W198 (2019).
108. Gao, J., Collyer, J., Wang, M., Sun, F. & Xu, F. Genetic Dissection of Hypertrophic
     Cardiomyopathy with Myocardial RNA-Seq. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, (2020).
109. Kim, D., Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory
     requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357–360 (2015).
                                                                      25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
110. Pertea, M. et al. StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-seq
     reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 290–295 (2015).
111. Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biol. 11,
     R106 (2010).
112. Xie, H. et al. Identification of TBX2 and TBX3 variants in patients with conotruncal heart defects
     by target sequencing. Hum. Genomics 12, 44 (2018).
113. Livak, K. J. & Schmittgen, T. D. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time
     quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods San Diego Calif 25, 402–408
     (2001).
114. Hildebrandt, M. R. et al. Precision Health Resource of Control iPSC Lines for Versatile
     Multilineage Differentiation. Stem Cell Rep. 13, 1126–1141 (2019).
115. Patel, P., Kuzmanov, U. & Mital, S. Avoiding false discovery in biomarker research. BMC
     Biochem. 17, 17 (2016).
116. Visonà, S. D. et al. Diagnosis of sudden cardiac death due to early myocardial ischemia: An
     ultrastructural and immunohistochemical study. Eur. J. Histochem. EJH 62, (2018).
117. Ashuach, T. et al. MPRAnalyze: statistical framework for massively parallel reporter assays.
     Genome Biol. 20, 183 (2019).
                                                                      26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1: Yield of protein-coding and regulatory variants in 228 unrelated childhood CMP cases.
(a) Flow-chart showing the selection process and yield of protein-coding and regulatory variants in the
overall cohort and in the gene-elusive subset. 36% of all cases harbored at least one pathogenic protein-
coding variant in a CMP gene; among the remaining 146 gene elusive cases, 20% harbored at least one
high risk regulatory variant in a CMP gene; and an additional 5% harbored a LoF variant in a novel
gene. (b) Pie diagram showing the distribution of protein-coding and regulatory variants in CMP genes
and LoF variants in novel genes across the cohort (n=228). WGS identified putatively causal protein-
coding SNVs/indels/CNVs in CMP genes in 36% of cases, high risk variants in regulatory elements of
CMP genes in an additional 20% of cases, and loss of function (LoF) variants in novel genes in an
additional 5% of cases. (c) Variant distribution by CMP subtypes: HCM cases had a higher yield of
pathogenic protein-coding variants compared to other CMP subtypes (OR 3.14, CI 1.77-5.57,
p=1.22×10-4). (d) Variant burden by patient in the cohort: 11 cases (5%) had multiple protein-coding
variants in known CMP genes, 10 cases (4%) had multiple regulatory variants, and 23 cases (10%) had
both protein-coding and regulatory variants in CMP genes. (e) Variant distribution by functional gene
categories: Of all the pathogenic protein-coding variants, 64% were in sarcomeric genes which
represented a significant enrichment compared to other gene categories (binomial p=3.16×10-49).
Conversely, none of the high-risk regulatory variants were in sarcomeric genes.
CMP, cardiomyopathy; SNV, single nucleotide variant; CNV, copy number variant; gnomAD, Genome
Aggregation Database; ACMG, American College of Medical Genetics; TFBS, transcription factor
binding site; P/LP, pathogenic or likely pathogenic; LoF, loss of function; HCM, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy;
Figure 2: Effect of loss of function and copy number deletions in CMP genes on myocardial gene
expression. The figure shows LV myocardial gene expression using RNA sequencing in the patient
harboring a loss of function or copy number deletion (red dot) compared to other cases without the
variant (grey dots) (n=35 cases). (a-c) Left panels show the amino acid position of three pathogenic loss
of function variants in DSC2 (stopgain), FLNC (splice acceptor), MYBPC3 (frameshift deletion)
predicted to result in nonsense-mediated decay of mRNA. The right panels show scaled RPKM
expression of target mRNA to below the 25th percentile compared to the remaining cohort; (d-f) The left
panels show the genomic location of three single CNV deletions in CTNNA3, JPH2, NEXN genes. The
right panels show scaled RPKM expression of target mRNA to below the 25th percentile compared to the
remaining cohort.
RPKM, Reads Per Kilobase of transcript, per Million mapped reads
Figure 3: Loss of function variants in novel CMP genes: Location of loss of function variants in (a)
NRAP (ENST00000359988), and (b) FHOD3 (ENST00000590592) in 228 CMP cases in the discovery
cohort (orange dots), and in 1326 CMP cases in the the 100,000 Genomes Project replication cohort
(blue dots). gnomAD background density map of variants is shown in grey. (c) Myocardial NRAP
expression: RNA-seq analysis demonstrated low NRAP mRNA expression (<75th percentile) in the LV
myocardium            of       a        DCM         patient        harboring       a      homozygous           frameshift           variant
(chr10:115401188_T/TAGCG) (red dot) compared to 34 CMP patients without the variant (black dots).
The boxplot shows median expression for the cohort, 25th and 75th percentiles, and lower and upper limit
values. qRT-PCR confirmed reduction of NRAP mRNA expression in patients with the variant
compared to 2 CMP patients without the variant i.e. WT (*p<0.05 vs WT). Western blot confirmed
downregulation of NRAP protein expression in the patient with the variant compared to 3 CMP patients
without the variant on representative Western blot images (*p<0.05 vs WT). (d-g) Zebrafish embryos
                                                                      27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Zebrafish embryos at 1-cell stage were injected with 4 CRISPR-Cas9 guide RNA complexes to induce
knockout of 2 genes, nrap and fhod3ab. (d) qRT-PCR showed a 35-49% downregulation of target
mRNA expression in pooled samples of nrap and fhod3ab mutants compared to WT controls and Cas9
only controls (n=3 independent replicates per gene) (**p<0.01 versus controls). (e) 22% nrap mutants
and 26% fhod3ab mutants showed an abnormal cardiac phenotype compared to 0% in Cas9 only
controls (**p<0.01 vs controls). (f) Atrial end-systolic area was higher and ventricular end-diastolic area
was lower in nrap and fhod3ab mutants compared to WT and Cas9 only controls (**p<0.01 versus
controls). (g) Representative phase contrast images of transgenic myl7:GFP embryos showing
cardiomegaly, atrial dilation and ventricular restriction in mutant embryos compared to wild type or
Cas9 only controls. (**p<0.01 versus controls). Scale bar = 50 µm. Data are shown as mean ± standard
deviations of three independent experiments per sample, with each experiment including 3 technical
replicates.
gnomAD, Genome Aggregation Database; WT, wild-type; mut, mutant
Figure 4: Regulatory variant burden in cases (n=228) and controls (n=1326). (a) Burden of Tier 1
regulatory variants in CMP genes in cases (orange) and controls (blue). There was a significant
enrichment of Tier 1 regulatory variants in the cases compared to controls (OR 2.14, 95% CI 1.60-2.86,
p=5.26×10-7). (b) Burden of Tier 1 regulatory variants by genes in cases in the discovery cohort versus
controls. Top 4 genes enriched for regulatory variants compared to controls included FKTN (OR=53.2,
CI=2.9-991), DTNA (OR=5.6, CI=2.5-12.5), DSC2 (OR 29.3, CI 1.4-611) and DSG2 (OR 9.7, CI 1.2-
74). (c) Replication cohort (n=1266): Scatter plot showed positive correlation between genes enriched
for high-risk regulatory variants in the CMP discovery cohort vs the 100,000 Genomes Project
replication cohort (Spearman ρ2 0.737, p=1.02×10-8) with the top genes being similar in both CMP
cohorts (FKTN, DTNA, DSC2, DSG2)
OR, Odds ratio
Figure 5: Genomic location of variants in regulatory elements of genes prioritized for functional
studies. The figures show the genomic coordinates of SNVs in the discovery cohort (n=228, orange
dots) and the 100,000 Genomes Project replication cohort (n=1266, blue dots) mapped relative to the
first (P1) promoter region and transcription start site for the following genes (a) BRAF, (b) DSP, (c)
DTNA, (d) FKRP, (e) FKTN, (f) LARGE1, and to the enhancer regions for (g) PRKAG2 (E15), and (h)
TGFB3 (E1). SNVs observed in gnomAD reference samples are plotted as grey density curves across
the region. All regulatory variants were observed with an allele frequency <0.01% in gnomAD dataset,
and tended to cluster in regions that were depleted for variants in gnomAD. Coordinates are based on
hg19 reference genome.
gnomAD, Genome Aggregation Database
Figure 6: Target gene and protein expression in the LV myocardium of patients harboring
regulatory variants. RNA Seq, qRT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry were performed in
available LV myocardium from CMP patients (n=35) to detect mRNA and protein expression of target
genes in patients harbouring regulatory variants in BRAF, DSP, FKTN, LARGE1, PRKAG2 or TGFB3.
For RNA sequencing data, the target scaled RPKM gene expression was compared between the patient
harboring the variant (red dot) and the remainder of the cohort (black dots) using boxplots showing
median expression for the cohort, 25th and 75th percentiles, and maximum and minimum values (n=35).
For qRT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry, target gene or protein expression in the LV
myocardium of the patient harboring the variant was compared to wild-type controls including an
autopsy sample from an individual without cardiac disease as well as one or more CMP patients that did
not harbour any known pathogenic coding or regulatory variants. Three independent experiments were
                                                                      28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
performed per sample with each experiment including three technical replicates per sample. Protein
expression level of GAPDH as a house keeping gene was used as a loading control for Western blots.
Error bars indicate standard deviation between the averages of each independent experiment. (a) BRAF:
Promoter variant chr7:140624223_G/A was associated with normal BRAF mRNA expression on
RNAseq, but reduced BRAF mRNA expression on qRT-PCR. Promoter variant chr7:140624286_C/T
was associated with increased mRNA expression on RNAseq (>75th percentile). (b) DSP: Promoter
variant (chr6:7541776_G/A) was associated with increased DSP mRNA expression on RNAseq (>75th
percentile), and on qRT-PCR (*p<0.05 vs controls). (c) FKTN: Promoter variant 1
(chr9:108320330_G/A) was associated with reduced FKTN mRNA expression on RNAseq (<75th
percentile), reduced mRNA expression on qRT-PCR (p<0.05 vs controls), reduced protein expression on
Western blot representative images, and reduced relative protein abundance on quantification (*p<0.05
vs controls). (d) LARGE1: Promoter variant chr22:34316416_C/T was associated with lower perinuclear
staining for LARGE1 (brown) (nuclear staining, blue) on representative immunohistochemistry images,
and lower % of LARGE1 positive cells in patient myocardium (*p<0.05 vs controls). Thymic tissue was
used as negative control. Scale bar = 20 µm. (e) PRKAG2: Enhancer variant chr7:151392181_A/C was
associated with normal PRKAG2 mRNA expression on RNAseq, but higher mRNA expression on qRT-
PCR (*p<0.05 vs controls), higher protein expression on Western blot representative images, and higher
relative protein expression on quantification (*p<0.05 vs controls). (f) TGFB3: Enhancer variant
(chr14:76289218_A/G) was associated with higher TGFB3 mRNA expression on RNAseq, higher
mRNA expression on qRT-PCR (*p<0.05 vs controls), higher protein expression on Western blot
representative images, and higher relative protein abundance on quantification (*p<0.05 vs controls).
RNA Seq, RNA sequencing; WT, Wild-type
Figure 7: Reporter assays in human iPSC-cardiomyocytes. (a) Luciferase reporter assay showing the
effect of regulatory variants on transcription. The cloned promoter variants of BRAF
(chr7:140624223_G/A), DTNA (chr18:32072866_A/G), FKRP (chr19:47249754_C/T), FKTN
(chr9:108319991_A/C, chr9:108320330_G/A), and LARGE1 (chr22:34316416_C/T) reduced luciferase
activity compared to reference sequences. The promoter variant of DSP (chr6:7541776_G/A), a second
promoter variant of LARGE1 (chr22:34316687_G/A), and an enhancer variant of TGFB3
(chr14:76289218_A/G) significantly increased luciferase activity compared to reference sequences.
*p<0.05 versus reference sequence. All luciferase reporter assays were performed with 3 biological
replicates, each with 3 technical replicates. (b) Volcano plot representing the effect of 54 regulatory
variants on gene expression using MPRA. 29 variants had significant differences in transcriptional
activity between reference and alternative allele (FDR<0.05, represented by horizontal black line). Grey
= CMP variant activity less than reference allele; black = CMP variant activity more than reference
allele. (c) 66% of significant variants were associated with higher transcription activity of the reference
allele. (d) Log2-fold transcriptional activity changes between alternative and reference allele sequences.
(e) Representative graphs of MPRA counts of alternative allele (green) versus reference allele sequences
(grey) of BRAF (chr7:140624223_G/A), DSP (chr6:7541468_T/C), and DTNA (chr18:32073296_C/G).
All MPRA assays were performed in 5 independent biological replicates.
MPRA, massively parallel reporter assay; ref seq, reference allele sequence; FDR, False discovery rate;
CMP, cardiomyopathy
                                                                      29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE LEGENDS
Supplementary Figure 1: Sequencing results of gene editing in zebrafish. Sanger sequencing of
gene-edited zebrafish (n=7) revealed a high burden of mutations in the exons targeted by 4 gRNAs for
(a) nrap, and (b) fhod3ab compared to Cas9 only controls. Panels show the reference sequence, location
of the gRNA, the targeted exon, effect of Cas9 only, versus CRISPR/Cas9 gRNA in zebrafish embryos.
SNVs, indels and large deletions are seen in brown and blue. nrap, fhod3a and fhod3b gRNAs caused
CRISPR edits in all injected embryos and were analyzed using Synthego ICE software as needed.
Ref-seq, reference sequence: gRNA, guide RNA; ICE, inference of CRISPR edits
Supplementary Figure 2: Pathways enriched for protein-coding and regulatory variants in the
overall cohort (n=228). (a) Gene Ontology (molecular function category) and Reactome pathways
enriched for pathogenic protein-coding and splicing variants. (b) Pathways enriched for high-risk Tier 1
regulatory variants including muscle-related categories, dystroglycan binding, fibroblast growth factor
receptors, and Ras pathways.
Supplementary Figure 3: Prediction effect of regulatory variants on transcription factor binding
motif. SeqLogo was used to predict motif disruption caused by variants in the regulatory elements of (a,
b) BRAF, (c) DSP, (d) DTNA, (e) FKRP, (f, g) FKTN, (h, i) LARGE1, (j) PRKAG2, and (k) TGFB3. The
nucleotide base pair outlined in the red box indicates the position of the variant in the motif. Regulatory
sequence analysis of variants shows a single nucleotide change in each variant compared to reference
sequence resulting in a disruption in transcription factor motifs that is predicted to be associated with
transcriptional up- or down-regulation of the target gene.
Major, reference sequence; Risk, variant sequence.
Supplementary Figure 4: Luciferase assays in hiPSC-derived CMs. (a) Luciferase reporter gene
vectors harboring various promoter sequences were used. The promoter-driven control Firefly luciferase
vector (pGL4-13_luc2_SV40) and Promoterless Firefly Luciferase Basic Vector (pGL4-10-luc2) were
used as a positive and a negative control, respectively. Renilla Luciferase control reporter vectors
(pRL_TK Vector) was used for normalization of transfection conditions. Sequence of regulatory
elements of the predicted variants and wild-type were commercially synthesized and cloned separately
into multiple cloning sites of Firefly Luciferase basic vectors, pGL4.10_luc2. hiPSC derived CMs were
co-transfected with firefly luciferase vector harboring regulatory sequences separately and Renilla
Luciferase control reporter vector. Luminescence was detected with Dual-Luciferase® Reporter
(DLR™) assay system. (b) Successful differentiation (cardiac troponin T staining in red) and
transfection of plasmid pX601_GFP (green) into day 21 PGP17 iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes using
Lipofectamine Stem Transfection Reagent. Magnification: ×20. (c) qRT-PCR was performed to detect
DNA contamination from plasmidpool transfection of 5 biological replicates of PGP17 cardiomyocytes.
(d) Unimodal distribution of barcodes that represent the oligonucleotides used in this project. DNA input
represents plasmid pool of oligonucleotides, whilst replicates 1-5 (each replicate split on two lanes of
HiSeq2500) flowcell are tag-seq libraries derived from the transfections in cardiomyocytes. (e) Pearson
correlation of 5 MPRA replicates.
hiPSC, human induced pluripotent stem cell; CM, cardiomyocytes; GFP, green fluorescent protein; P,
plasmid; Pr, promoter; En, Enhancer; Luc, Luciferase; RES, Regulatory element sequence, WT, wild-
type; V, Variant; rep, replicate
                                                                      30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES
Supplementary Table 1: Clinical characteristics of pediatric cardiomyopathy probands in the discovery
cohort (n=228).
Supplementary Table 2: Cardiomyopathy gene list.
Supplementary Table 3: Cardiomyopathy genes harboring pathogenic or likely pathogenic coding
SNVs and indels (n=228 unrelated cases).
Supplementary Table 4: Copy number variants affecting cardiomyopathy genes (n=228 unrelated
cases).
Supplementary Table 5: Loss of function variants in novel cardiomyopathy genes (n=228 unrelated
cases).
Supplementary Table 6: Loss of function variants in NRAP and FHOD3 in cardiomyopathy discovery
(n=228) and replication (n=1266) cohorts.
Supplementary Table 7: High-risk (and candidate) Tier 1 SNVs in regulatory elements of
cardiomyopathy genes (n=228 cases)
Supplementary Table 8: Tier 1 SNVs in regulatory elements of cardiomyopathy genes evaluated by
MPRA (n=228 cases)
Supplementary Table 9: Regulatory regions of cardiomyopathy genes for mapping non-coding
variants.
Supplementary Table 10: Normalized RNAseq data for genes with high-risk CNVs, LoF and
regulatory variants
Supplementary Table 11: Primer pairs for qRT-PCR in LV myocardium of candidate genes harboring
regulatory variants.
Supplementary Table 12: Antibodies used for Western blot and immunohistochemistry
Supplementary Table 13: Synthesis of gene promoter and enhancer sequences for luciferase assays.
Supplementary Table 14: Design of single guide RNAs to target novel genes in zebrafish embryos.
Supplementary Table 15: Primer pairs for CRISPR-Cas9 editing of novel genes in zebrafish embryos.
Supplementary Table 16: Primer pairs for qRT-PCR for novel genes targeted by CRISPR-Cas9 gene
editing in zebrafish embryos.
                                                                      31

                                medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
           Figure 1 (which was not certified by peerIt review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                       is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
a                                                                  228 CMP cases                                                  b
                                                                    [Sup. Table 1]
                                                                                                                                                                                               34%
                                                                                                                                                                39%
                                                     133 CMP genes                                        Novel genes
                            Protein-coding regions                     Regulatory regions             Protein-coding regions
                                                                   (promoters and enhancers)
                          SNVs/indels      CNVs                        SNVs            CNVs                SNVs/indels                                                                        2%
        ACMG guidelines                                       TFBS disrupting
                                                                                                                                                                                             1%
                                          >1kb in size                                >1kb in size
        gnomAD<0.01%                      MSSNG<1%            gnomAD<0.01%            MSSNG<1%                                                                           5%            19%
71 P/LP SNVs/indels                       6 P/LP CNVs         313 Tier 1 SNVs         2 Tier 1 CNVs
  78 cases (34%)                          6 cases (3%)
                                                                                                                                                            100%
   [Sup. Table 3]                        [Sup. Table 4]                                                                          c
                                                                                                                                      Percentage of cases
                            82 cases total (36%)
                      146 gene elusive cases (64%)                                                                                                          75%
                                                           Active in left ventricle
                                                           Gene odds ratio>1.3
                                                                                                                                                            50%
                                                                 52 high-risk
                                                              regulatory SNVs 2 regulatory CNVs
                                                                                      2 cases (1%)                                                          25%
                                                               43 cases (19%)
                                                                                     [Sup. Table 4]
                                                                [Sup. Table 7]
                                                                       45 cases total (20%)
                                                                                                                                                                0%
                       101 gene and regulatory elusive cases (44%)                                                                                                      All     HCM    DCM     Other
                                                                                                      High confidence LoF                                             n=228     n=76   n=112   n=40
                                                                                                       Heart-associated
                     CMP protein-coding SNV/indel                                                       gnomAD<0.01%
                     CMP protein-coding CNV
                                                                                                                                                            6
                     CMP regulatory SNV
                                                                                                       11 LoF SNVs/indels
                                                                                                                                  d
                     CMP regulatory CNV
                                                                                                                                      Number of variants
                                                                                                         11 cases (5%)                                      5
                     Novel protein-coding SNV/indel
                     Gene elusive                                                                         [Sup. Table 5]
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                            2
e                    30
                                                                                                                                                            1
Number of variants
                     20                                                                                                                                                       Case (n=228)
                     10
                      0
                       M MY
                        YB HP 7
                        TN C3
                            N
                         TN T2
                             N
                          TP I3
                        AC M1
                            TC  1                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                           D SP
                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                           D C2
                                                                                                                             SG                                            C V
                                                                                                                                                                             TN C
                                                                                                                                                                             M NA  L
                          FL
                          N NN
                            TT
                            P
                        TN LN
                            EX
                           EMNC
                           FH DC
                               N1                                                                                          BRJU 2
                                                                                                                                P                                              YO 3
                                                                                                                                                                              TC Z2
                                                                                                                                                                                 AP
                        T  JP L2
                          L H2
                        M MN
                          YO A
                          N 1
                       PR GF M
                            EBB L                                                                                          SO F
                                                                                                                           N S1
                                                                                                                         PT RA
                                                                                                                           PN SA                                              RY
                                                                                                                                                                             SC R
                          D 3
                        R LBM
                         AL 16
                            PK
                           EY 3
                          BA A4
                          G 3
                       TMBM 1G
                          EM20
                       PR 0
                          KA
                        PO G  7                                                                                            R 11
                                                                                                                             AF
                                                                                                                            R 1
                                                                                                                              IT 1                                          C CCN 2
                                                                                                                                                                          SL AB 5A
                                                                                                                                                                              25 9
                          D M 2
                            TN
                          FK A
                          SC
                          C 2
                        C PT2
                           O  T2
                             TN
                             O
                            X1                                                                                             C H KB                                         PL LAMA2 0
                                5                                                                                                                                            EK P
                                                                                                                                                                                H 2
                                                                                                                                                                                 M 2
                          Sarcomeric            Structural                                    Metabolic Mitochondrial    RAS        Z disc   Lysosomal
                                   Cytoskeletal                                 Signaling        Dystroglycan Desmosomal   Neurohormonal Channel

               medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    Figure 2 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
a                                                                                                                                                                                                     1. 0
     DSC2
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DSC2
                    Cadherin conserved site                   Cadherin-like                                                 p.Q620*                                                                   0. 8
                    Cadherin prodomain                        Cadherin-like Superfamily
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 0
        0                                 200                          400                                        600                                    800
                                                                   Amino Acid Position
b                                                                                                                                                                                                     1. 0
    FLNC                                                                                   Actinin type ac tin binding domain, conse rved sit e   Filamin/A BP2 80 repeat like                               FLNC1
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                                                       c.3791-1G                           Calponin homo logy domain                              Immunoglobulin E set                                0. 8
                                                                                           CH domain superf amily                                 Immunoglobulin like fold
                                                                                           Filamin/A BP2 80 repeat                                                                                    0. 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 2
        0                                               1000                                                          2000
                                                                  Amino Acid Position                                                                                                                 0. 0
c
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1. 0
     MYBPC3
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                  Fibroncetin type III                 Immunoglobulin subtype       Immunoglobulin -like domain superfamily
                                                                                    Imm                                                                                                                      MYBPC3
                  Fibroncetin type III superfamily     Immunoglobulin subtype 2     Immunoglobulin -like fold
                                                                                    Imm                                        p.P955fs                                                               0. 8
                 Immunoglobulin I-set                  Immunoglobulin like domain   MyBPC, tri helix bundle domain
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
        0                                                    500                                                               1000                                                                   0. 2
                                                                   Amino Acid Position                                                                                                                0. 0
d
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CTNNA3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 8
                                                        single copy deletion                                                                                                                          0. 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 0
                                                                      CTNNA3
e
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              JPH2
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 6
                                                                  single copy deletion
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 0
                                     JPH2
f
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              NEXN
                                                                                                                                                                                 Scaled mRNA lvevel
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 8
                                                     single copy deletion                                                                                                                             0. 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0. 0
                                                                                    NEXN

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                 Figure 3             It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                  a
                                                         NRAP                            3+                                                             Discovery
                                                                                    p.     1G                                                           100,000 Genomes Project
                                                                                      Y4      >
                                                                                         20 T
                     gnomAD density
                                               0.04                           c.99         fs
                                               0.03
                                               0.02
                                               0.01
                                                     0
                                                                                                         500                                                                                         1000                                  1500
                                                                                                                                                  Amino Acid Position
                  b
                                                         FHOD3                                                                                        c.1646+1G>T
                                                                                                                               2fs                    c.1646+1G>A
                                                                                                     2f p.T                                           c.1646+1G>A
                                                                                                       s   50                                         c.1646+1G>A
                       gnomAD density
                                          0.0075
                                                                                     p.T5
                                          0.0050                                          0
                                          0.0025
                                                     0                                                                            500                 Amino Acid Position                                 1000                                                1500
                 c                                                                                                                                                    NRAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Marker   WT1   WT2   Variant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Relative protein expression
                     chr10:115401188:T:TAGCG                                                          1.2                                                                                                                                                                       120
                    Scaled mRNA level                                          Relative expression
                                                                                                        1                                                         180 KDa                                                             NRAP                                      100
                                                                                                      0.8                                                         130 KDa                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                      0.6                                                         100 KDa                                                                                                        60
                   0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                   70 KDa
                                                                                      [ Ct]
                                                                                                      0.4                                                             55 KDa                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                      0.2                                                                                                                                                                        20             *
                                                                                                                                                          *       40 KDa                                                              GAPDH
                                                                                                        0                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                              WT       Variant                                                                                                                        WT   Variant
                 d                                                                                   e                                                                 f
                                                                                                         % with abnormal cardiac phenotype
                                               1.2                                                                                           40                                                       4
                    Relative gene expression
                                                                                                                                                                           Chamber area size (mm2)
                                                1                                                                                                                                                    3.5                    **                                                        WT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAS-9
                                                                                                                                             30                                                       3                                                                               NRAP-mut
                                                                               **                                                                                                                                                     **
                                               0.8                                                                                                               **                                  2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FHOD3ab-mut
                                                                                                                                                          **
                                               0.6                                                                                           20                                                       2
                                                                         **
                              [ Ct]
                                               0.4              **                                                                                                                                   1.5                                                                                   **
                                                                                                                                             10                                                       1                                                                               **
                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                0                                                                                            0                                                        0
                                                 C
                                                         9       OD       ut                                                                      AP 9
                                                                                                                                                 as   -m                                                         Atrial end-systole          Ventricular end-diastole
                                                  as     AP         3a -m                                                                     C   3a     ut
                                                           -m FH          ut                                                                         b-m
                                                                O D                                                                                      ut
                                                     NR             3b                                                                            R    O
                                                             FH        -m ut
                                                                                                                                                 N      D
                                                                                                                                                     FH
                 g                                           WT                                                                              CAS-9                                                   NRAP-mut                              FHOD3ab-mut
                   ventricular diastole
                                                                                                                                  ventricle
                                                         ventricle                                                                                                                                                                          ventricle
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ventricle
                                                                                                                                             atrium
                                                         atrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                atrium                            atrium
                  ventricular systole
                                                             ventricle
                                                                                                                                         ventricle                                                                                           ventricle
                                                                                                                                                                           ventricle
                                                                                                                                                                           ventricle
                                                             atrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           atrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           atrium
                                                                                                                                                 atrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                     atrium                                                                      50 µM

                                                          medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 4
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .                                   Discovery vs Controls
a                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                       OR =2.14 (1.60 2.86)                      FKTN
                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                       p =5.26 ×10                               DSC2
                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                 DSG2
Proportion of samples
                                                                                               Cohort
                                                                                                                                 DTNA
                                                                                                    Discovery
                                                                                                    Controls                     LAMP2
                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                  JUP
                                                                                                                                 TCAP
                                                    0.2                                                                           EYA4
                                                                                                                              PRDM16
                                                                                                                             PLEKHM2
                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                 BRAF
                                                              0              2                 4                 6                NEBL
                                                                            Variant frequency
                                                                                                                             SLC25A20
                                                                                                                                 SCO2
c
                                                                                                                               POMT2
   100,000 Genomes Project vs controls odds ratio
                                                                                                                 DSC2
                                                    8.0                                                                          MYOZ2
                                                                                                                                  JPH2
                                                                                     JUP                 DSG2
                                                                                           LAMP2                                  FHL2
                                                                           TCAP                                      FKTN
                                                                                                                                 TGFB3
                                                    2.0             NEBL                                                         NEXN
                                                                                           DTNA
                                                                         EYA4
                                                                    PLEKHM2                                                       GLB1
                                                                  SLC25A20                         Pathway
                                                                 MYOZ2
                                                                 POMT2
                                                                    BRAF                                                      PRKAG2
                                                                  SCO2                 Channel
                                                                 FHL2                  Desmosomal
                                                              SOS1
                                                              PRKAG2
                                                                 JPH2
                                                                TGFB3                  Dystroglycan
                                                                                                                                 NRAS
                                                               EMD                     Lysosomal
                                                    0.5       DSP      PRDM16
                                                                                       Metabolic
                                                                                       Mitochondrial
                                                                                       RAS                                        EMD
                                                              NRAS
                                                                NEXN                   Signaling
                                                                                       Structural
                                                                GLB1                   Z disc                                     SOS1
                                                              CPT2                                   a   a   a   a   a   a
                                                                                       a   a   a
                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                  CPT2
                                                          1           2          4          8                    29 53
                                                                  Discovery vs controls odds ratio                                DSP
                                                                                                                                                 1    8    64 512
                                                                                                                                                     Odds ratio

       medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 5 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                             It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

               Figure 6
              a                              BRAF                           b                            DSP
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                    chr7:140624223:G:A                                           chr6:7541776:G:A
                                                                                                                                                                                      Relative expression
  (which was not certified     by peer review) is the
                                                   1.2 author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display 1.8
                                                                                                                   the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                 Relative expression
                                                                                                                                  *
                Scaled mRNA level                                                                                Scaled mRNA level
                                      It is made available
                                                    1      under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .         1.6
                                                   0.8          *                                                  1.4
                                                                                                                   1.2
                                                   0.6                                                               1
                  0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                       [∆∆Ct]                                                                                                               [∆∆Ct]
                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                  0.2 0.40.6 0.8 1.0
                                                   0.4                                                             0.6
                                                   0.2                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                    0                                                                0
                                                        WT Variant                                                       WT Variant
               c                                                                               FKTN
                                      chr9:108320330:G:A                               1.2                                             Variant
                                                             Relative expression
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.2
                Scaled mRNA level
                                                                                                                                       WT1             WT3
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                       Relative protein
                                                                                                                                                       WT4                                                             1
                                                                                       0.8            *                                WT2             WT5                                                            0.8
                                                                                       0.6                                                                                                                            0.6
                 0.2 0.4 0.60.8 1.0
                                                                                                              70 KDa
                                                                    [∆∆Ct]                                                                                                              expression
                                                                                       0.4                                                                                                                            0.4          *
                                                                                       0.2                    55 KDa                                                     FKTN                                         0.2
                                                                                        0                     40 KDa                                                     GAPDH                                         0
                                                                                              WT    Variant                                                                                                                 WT   Variant
               d                                                                                                           LARGE1
                                      Negative ctr. “Thymus”                                 WT1                  WT2                                   chr22:34316416:C:T                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                   % positive cells
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Thymus WT Variant
                                                    20 µm
               e                                                                                                       PRKAG2
                                      chr7:151392181:A:C
                                                                                                                                       Marker               Variant
                                                                                                                                                                                                    180                            *
               Scaled mRNA level
                                                                                 1.8
                                                           Relative expression
                                                                                                      *                                         WT1   WT2
                                                                                                                                                                                Relative protein
                                                                                 1.6                                                                                                                160
                                                                                 1.4                                                                                                                140
                                                                                 1.2                                                                                                                120
                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                  expression
                                                                                                               70 KDa
                                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                  [∆∆Ct]
                                                                                 0.8                           55 KDa                                                 PRKAG2
                                                                                 0.6                           40KDa                                                                                 60
                                                                                 0.4                           35KDa                                                                                 40
                                                                                 0.2                           25 KDa                                                                                20
                                                                                  0
                                                                                              WT   Variant     40 KDa                                                 GAPDH                                                 WT   Variant
               f                                                                                                       TGFB3
                                      chr14:76289218:A:G                               6                                                                                                           160                            *
                                                                                                                                       Marker               Variant
               Scaled mRNA level                           Relative expression
                                                                                                      *                                                                                            140
                                                                                                                                                                                Relative protein
                                                                                                                                                WT1   WT2
                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   120
                                                                                       4                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                               70 KDa                                                                               80
                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                  expression
                                                                                                               55 KDa                                                 TGFB3
                0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                               [∆∆Ct]
                                                                                       2                       40 KDa                                                                               60
                                                                                                               35 KDa                                                                               40
                                                                                       1                       25 KDa                                                                               20
                                                                                       0                       15 KDa                                                                                0
                                                                                             WT    Variant     40 KDa                                                 GAPDH                                                 WT   Variant

              Figure 7
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211474.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
