medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          Title
          Implementing a Telemedicine Curriculum for Internal Medicine Residents during a
          Pandemic: The Cleveland Clinic Experience
          Authors
          David J. Savage, MD, PhD1, Omar Gutierrez, MD1, Bryce Montane, MD1, Achintya Dinesh
          Singh, MD1, Eric Yudelevich, MD2, Jamal Mahar, MD2, Andrei Brateanu, MD2, Lakshmi
          Khatri, MD2, Catherine Fleisher, MD2, and Stacey Jolly, MD2;3
          1
            Resident, Internal Medicine Residency Program, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
          2
            Associate Program Director, Internal Medicine Residency Program, Cleveland Clinic
          Foundation
          3
            Director of Ambulatory Curriculum, Internal Medicine Residency Program, Cleveland Clinic
          Foundation
          Abstract
          Introduction
          Telemedicine is an important element of healthcare. However, until the COVID-19
          pandemic, training in telemedicine was not a substantial element of most residency
          programs. Social distancing measures changed this. The Cleveland Clinic Internal Medicine
          Residency Program (IMRP) is one of the largest programs in the United States, which made
          the task of developing and adopting an effective, expedited telemedicine curriculum
          challenging. Our goal was to implement a system for teaching telemedicine care skills and
          supervising the care provided by residents during virtual visits.
                                                                                                                                        1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          Methods
          This study was started in April 2020. We developed and implemented a resident-led
          curriculum and training program for providing telemedicine care in less than five weeks. This
          entailed creating a formal training program for residents, creating a resource guide for the
          different video communication tools, and training preceptors to safely supervise care in this
          new paradigm. We also created an assessment instrument in our education evaluation
          system that allows residents to receive feedback on their performance during virtual
          appointments.
          Results
          Over 2000 virtual visits were performed by residents in a span of 10 weeks. Of 148
          residents, 38% responded to the pre-participation survey. A majority had no prior
          telemedicine experience and expressed only slight comfort with the modality.
          Discussion
          Through collaboration with experienced residents and faculty, we expeditiously developed
          an enhancement to our ambulatory care curriculum to teach residents how to provide virtual
          care and help faculty with supervision. We share our insights on this experience for other
          residency programs to utilize.
          Introduction
                    The first documented cases of COVID-19 in Ohio occurred on March 9, 20201. One
          day later, the Cleveland Clinic’s leadership announced that all in-person meetings were
          cancelled and ambulatory patient visits would be virtual. This was a major paradigm shift for
          our Internal Medicine Residency Program (IMRP), where one-third of training time is spent in
          ambulatory clinics. Teaching residents at one of the largest programs in the country to
          provide virtual visits on short notice was an enormous endeavor. In addition, we needed to
                                                                                                                                2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          make sure that all faculty had the tools they needed to precept residents in a completely
          virtual format.
                    A cohort of Cleveland Clinic faculty physicians have been performing virtual patient
          visits since 2014 using the American Well platform2. They conducted 41,000 virtual visits in
          2019 and over 100,000 such visits by February 20203. Residents, however, had not been
          trained in delivering virtual care prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. In any given week, our
          IMRP residents complete around 840 ambulatory patient encounters. The avoidance of in-
          person visits for routine care as a result of social distancing measures would have deprived
          our community of considerable primary care, as well as limited learning opportunities for
          residents.
                    Our IMRP’s clinician-educator track (CET) residents began building a telemedicine
          curriculum before the start of the pandemic. The original plan was for a slow, stepwise roll-
          out of the curriculum with the new interns in Fall 2020. However, the urgent need created by
          the pandemic called for an accelerated implementation of this nascent telemedicine
          curriculum.
          Methods
                    The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) had planned to
          integrate telemedicine into the Common Program Requirements in July 2020. Considering
          the pandemic, precepted telemedicine encounters were permissible immediately4. Our
          telemedicine curriculum allowed us to quickly train residents and preceptors to serve our
          community with virtual visits. Study of the telemedicine curriculum was started in April 2020
          and was determined to be exempt by the Cleveland Clinic IRB.
                    Our ambulatory sites accommodate 148 residents and vary in size and target
          demographics. Residents function as primary care physicians during their clinic week (4+1
          model) in nine different clinic sites. Implementing this program involved preparing and
          standardizing clinic work-flow documents for residents and a precepting guide for faculty
                                                                                                                                3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          across the different ambulatory sites across the different ambulatory sites (see Appendices).
          We created an orientation presentation to standardize virtual visits inspired by external
          resources from the American College of Physicians (ACP), the Ohio State Medical
          Association (OSMA), and the ACGME. Telemedicine training for residents was conducted
          virtually by Zoom, a practice that has been widely used at other institutions to implement
          virtual curricula5.
          1. Trainee Pre- and Post-Participation Surveys
                    Residents were surveyed about their prior telemedicine experience and perceptions
          of telemedicine before participating in this telemedicine curriculum. We then surveyed
          residents at the end of the academic year to assess their perception of the curriculum in
          improving their capability to provide virtual primary care.
          2. Communication Competencies
                    We considered it paramount to teach our residents how to communicate and perform
          remote exams with virtual tools, which require unique communication skills6. Residents
          watched a recording of a simulated encounter prior to their first real encounter (see
          Appendices). We demonstrated potential pitfalls of a virtual encounter (from technology-
          specific issues such as audio or connectivity problems, to challenges in virtual verbal
          communication) and paused periodically for discussion. This gave residents an opportunity
          to share their impressions with the group and brainstorm possible solutions. The Cleveland
          Clinic Communication Tips for Virtual Visits (see Appendices) was used to teach resident
          essential skills (e.g. conveying respect, setting an agenda, and providing reflective listening
          using non-verbal communication). The presentation also reviewed practical tips such as
          looking at the camera instead of the screen, which provides the appearance of direct eye
          contact. Initially, virtual visits were conducted in dedicated patient rooms on campus, but
          eventually many visits were conducted remotely in order to provide appropriate social
                                                                                                                                4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          distancing for trainees and staff. Medical decisions were always discussed with and
          approved by attending physicians, either over the video platform, by phone, or in person.
          3.Virtual Physical Examination Competency
                    Physical examinations in telemedicine must be augmented to fit the virtual nature of
          the encounter. Two inherent challenges with virtual visits are the physician’s ability to
          describe the exam he/she needs, and the patient’s ability to perform the exam on video. In
          our program, we taught the virtual physical exam with Zoom. We used problem-based
          questions and interactive cases, with symptoms ranging from ankle pain to vision changes.
          During these scenarios, we emphasized creativity. We showed residents how to teach a
          patient the Ottawa ankle rules to address ankle pain, for example, thus saving them a visit to
          the emergency department.
          4. Telemedicine Technology Platform Competency
                    Virtual encounters were initially offered using a variety of platforms including
          American Well, Doximity, Skype, and Apple FaceTime. We created a resource slide deck
          with practical tips on how to install and use each of those platforms (see Appendices). One
          month later, our institution started using a secure version of Zoom integrated into our EMR
          (Epic Systems) to streamline virtual visits. Our slide deck was updated to incorporate this
          new platform. Residents also viewed an institutional video that walked them through using
          Zoom within Epic for virtual visits.
          5. Teaching Documentation of Virtual Encounters
                    Residents and preceptors were taught how to appropriately document virtual
          encounters. New documentation elements to the standard ambulatory note included a
          statement that the encounter was conducted by phone or video, an estimate of the time it
          took to provide care, and a description of the findings of the virtual physical exam, if
          performed. Preceptors also needed to attest that the visit was provided either by phone or
                                                                                                                                5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          video, and indicate whether they were present for a portion of the encounter. These
          documentation changes were facilitated with new templated phrases in Epic that all
          residents and staff physicians could use.
          6. Virtual Encounter Formative Trainee Evaluation
                    We created a formal evaluation process to help residents improve their practice.
          Residents were still required to precept their patient care with a staff physician. Staff
          physician could join the encounter at any time, especially during the visit wrap-up where the
          resident covers the plan with the patient and answers questions. Residents were also able to
          get direct observation and feedback during collection of the patient’s history and their
          performance of the physical examination in the virtual setting. This mirrored the process for
          in-person visits. We created a mini-clinical evaluation exercise (Mini-CEX) for telemedicine
          centered around the ACGME core competencies7. Each resident was encouraged to send
          an electronic mini-CEX survey to faculty to get actionable feedback on their virtual visit, and
          CEX evaluations were geared to evaluate for the nuances of the virtual encounter.
          7. Precepting the Virtual Encounter
                    Dynamic changes in recommendations for trainee virtual visit by the ACGME and
          billing and supervision rules from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS),
          made regular updates for all provider participating in virtual care precepting environment
          paramount. Our precepting team clinic leaders collaborated to identify champions for
          maintaining updates to ACGME and CMS rules and providing weekly and as-needed
          updates to all faculty, residents, and support staff involved in scheduling. This incorporated
          changes to workflow for consent to encounter, location of preceptor (direct or indirect
          supervision) and identification of the types of encounters for which the CMS primary care
          exception, where the preceptor does not interact with the patient, could be utilized during the
          COVID-19 public health emergency. Although the cadence of these changes in the future is
                                                                                                                                6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          anticipated to be slower, the successful utilization of a telemedicine curriculum includes a
          support structure to update and incorporate rapid changes as needed.
          Results
                    Our team designed and implemented the telemedicine curriculum within four weeks.
          All 148 ambulatory residents in our IMRP have now been trained in performing virtual visits
          and have completed more than 2000 such visits since early April 2020. In total, 56 residents
          completed the orientation pre-participation survey with a total response rate of 38%. Forty-
          three residents completed the post-participation survey, with a total response rate of 29%.
          Of residents responding on the pre-participation survey, 68% had no prior telemedicine
          experience and indicated limited comfort with the modality (Table 1). The post-participation
          survey assessed the residents’ perception of the quality of this curriculum in teaching
          telemedicine skills. A majority of respondents were third-year residents (n = 20, 46.5%), and
          67.4% of respondents (n = 29) reported learning new knowledge about telemedicine
          because of the curriculum that was offered (Table 2).
          Discussion
                    Our experience demonstrates that teaching and precepting telemedicine in resident
          ambulatory clinics is feasible. Implementing any type of curriculum or training program
          requires extensive preparation, involvement of multiple stakeholders, and competing time
          constraints. The urgency of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting changes to
          healthcare delivery allowed us to move this process along quickly within a major tertiary
          medical center and the one of the largest internal medicine residency programs in the United
          States. This project is also notable for having significant trainee leadership from inception.
                    In many regards, the process for scheduling, performing, precepting, and
          documenting a virtual visit parallels a traditional encounter. One key difference, however, is
                                                                                                                                7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          the physical exam. Each encounter started as a phone call, and then video could be added if
          needed. Many of our older patients did not have a video-enabled device, which made visual
          appointments challenging, even when warranted. It was also cumbersome at first for
          residents to find a video platform that would work for each patient. Patients were much more
          likely to adopt video calls early on when we offered a wide variety of choices. Our
          institution’s rollout of Epic with embedded Zoom video made visual appointments more
          uniform.
                    To evaluate our curriculum, we used pre- and post-participation surveys modeled
          after the work of others in creating a longitudinal telemedicine curriculum8. The pre-
          participation results indicated that a majority of residents had not had prior telemedicine
          experience, but that they felt it was an important skill to learn and would be part of their
          future practice (Table 1). The post-participation survey indicated that this curriculum was
          perceived as effective at teaching telemedicine skills that could be applied immediately to
          serve patients (Table 2). Residents selected Strongly Agree or Agree to each of the eight
          statements on the post-participation by over 60% per question, suggesting that the
          curriculum provided benefit in teaching telemedicine skills. Free response survey answers
          provided both positive and growth-oriented feedback. In regard to the content, many
          residents felt that it helped bridge the skill gap created by the pandemic. One respondent
          wrote “It was very helpful as I had no formal training in telemedicine before this time and I
          had to do virtual visits in my Resident PCP clinic during COVID-19.” Regarding the delivery
          of the content, some respondents wrote that the classroom course was “not interactive
          enough” or that “too much of the presentation was obvious or common sense.” Thus, while
          beneficial, there remains significant room for improvement in the telemedicine curriculum by
          building upon this feedback in coming years.
                    Now that our residents have had at least three ambulatory weeks of telemedicine
          encounters, our next step will be to assess their self-reported competency in providing
          telemedicine care by phone or video. Since a majority of residents from the 2019-2020
          academic year did not have prior telemedicine experience, it will be helpful to understand
                                                                                                                                8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          how residents’ skillsets have changed because of this curriculum and hands on experience
          in clinic. In addition, residents are now soliciting formal objective feedback from their
          ambulatory preceptors on their performance with quarterly summative evaluations and on-
          demand Mini-CEX evaluations specific to virtual visits. These feedback tools will help
          learners improve and provide a further assessment of this curriculum. The new interns in
          2020-2021 will offer in-person visits exclusively for the first six months of the year, and then
          will have at least one telemedicine slot per ambulatory week thereafter. We believe this will
          allow the newest trainees time to better understand the workflow at our institution and the
          tools available to serve their patients in a hands-on, supervised environment before those
          interns begin performing telemedicine encounters. They will also receive the Introduction to
          Telemedicine course that was offered to all residents in our residency program at the start of
          the pandemic.
                    Limitations. Our limitations were a low survey response rate and variable preceptor
          experience with telemedicine. The response rate for the pre-participation survey was higher
          than the post-participation survey, but the response rate on both instruments was low. This
          is likely because of the accelerated pace that this curriculum was rolled out to meet the
          needs of our learners and patients. The pre-participation survey was offered immediately
          before the telemedicine curriculum was taught, while the post-participation survey was
          distributed electronically at the end of the academic year. We had the most success with
          getting pre-participation surveys completed by providing time at the start of the didactic
          course for residents to fill them out with their phones. We also kept the number of survey
          questions short to encourage participation. It has thus far been even more challenging to get
          learner post-participation feedback because of their busy work schedules and the ongoing
          pandemic. The post-participation survey response rate was also impacted by timing. It was
          distributed at the end of the academic year when many residents were preparing to graduate
          or advance to the next training year. Anecdotally, though, residents have told their
          preceptors and program leaders that this curriculum made them feel more comfortable with
          providing telemedicine care.
                                                                                                                                9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                    Lack of preceptor experience with ambulatory telemedicine was also a limitation
          early on, but this improved with time, practice, and the creation of a faculty preceptor guide.
          Since preceptors supervise resident care, the biggest change in workflow has been at the
          end of each encounter. If a resident wants the preceptor to examine the patient or be
          available on the line to listen to the wrap-up with the patient, the preceptors need to either
          join the resident in person or connect to the encounter by three-way video or phone. This
          was something that our faculty mentors and learners adapted to quickly, and this would be a
          very manageable barrier within any other residency program, especially those of smaller
          size. Despite challenges in assessment and ambulatory precepting, this curriculum has
          served the needs of our residents well, and it will be a sustainable element of our training
          program.
                    The ideal telemedicine curriculum for residents should provide training in how to
          conduct a virtual interview and exam, as well as mechanisms for receiving feedback from
          precepted virtual visits. Patient access to video-enabled technology is a limitation, but phone
          visits can be effective when a physical exam is not warranted. We hope our experience can
          guide other programs in developing a lasting telemedicine curriculum that prepares
          physicians-in-training for a practice landscape that includes virtual visits.
          What is already known on the subject:
                •     Prior to March 2020, telemedicine training for residents and fellows was limited,
                      even though telemedicine was quickly emerging as widespread tool for providing
                      care
                •     Telemedicine curricula for residents and fellows are quite new, but their
                      development was accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic
          Study’s Main Messages:
               •    A standardized curriculum for trainees and faculty members can build competency
                    with providing care using telemedicine
                                                                                                                              10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
               •    Trainee leadership in building a telemedicine curriculum can accelerate development
                    and increase buy-in from both faculty and peers.
          Appendices
          A. Communication Tips Virtual Visits CCF.pdf
          B. Telemedicine Training Video.mp4
          C. Telemedicine Survey – Pre-Participation.pdf
          D. Telemedicine Survey – Post-Participation.pdf
          E. Precepting Guide for Telemedicine CCF.docx
          References
          1.       Associated Press. 3 confirmed cases of coronavirus in Ohio; DeWine declares State
                   of Emergency. WBNS. https://www.10tv.com/article/3-confirmed-cases-coronavirus-
                   ohio-dewine-declares-state-emergency-2020-mar. Published 2020. Accessed May 2,
                   2020.
          2.       Cleveland Clinic. Cleveland Clinic, American Well Partner to Launch Digital Health
                   Company. https://newsroom.clevelandclinic.org/2019/10/21/cleveland-clinic-american-
                   well-partner-to-launch-digital-health-company/. Published 2019. Accessed May 2,
                   2020.
          3.       Cleveland Clinic. Celebrating 100,000 Outpatient Virtual Visits.
                   https://consultqd.clevelandclinic.org/celebrating-100000-outpatient-virtual-visits/.
          4.       ACGME. ACGME Response to COVID-19: Clarification regarding Telemedicine and
                   ACGME Surveys.
                   https://www.acgme.org/Newsroom/Blog/Details/ArticleID/10125/ACGME-Response-
                   to-COVID-19-Clarification-regarding-Telemedicine-and-ACGME-Surveys. Accessed
                   May 19, 2020.
                                                                                                                              11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          5.       Almarzooq ZI, Lopes M, Kochar A. Virtual Learning During the COVID-19 Pandemic:
                   A Disruptive Technology in Graduate Medical Education. J Am Coll Cardiol.
                   2020;75(20):2635-2638. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.015
          6.       van Galen LS, Wang CJ, Nanayakkara PWB, Paranjape K, Kramer MHH, Car J.
                   Telehealth requires expansion of physicians’ communication competencies training.
                   Med Teach. 2019;41(6):714-715. doi:10.1080/0142159X.2018.1481284
          7.       Swing SR. The ACGME outcome project: Retrospective and prospective. Med Teach.
                   2007;29(7):648-654. doi:10.1080/01421590701392903
          8.       Kirkland EB, DuBose-Morris R, Duckett A. Telehealth for the internal medicine
                   resident: A 3-year longitudinal curriculum. J Telemed Telecare. December
                   2019:1357633X19896683. doi:10.1177/1357633X19896683
          Table 1. Resident telemedicine orientation pre-participation survey responses (N = 56)
                                                                                                      Respondents comfort with
          Responses                               Respondents with prior telehealth experience        conducting telehealh visits
          Current PGY year          %             Medical school                                   2% Very comfortable                    7%
          PGY-1               46% (n=26)          Demonstration by attending                      23% Comfortable                        23%
          PGY-2               33% (n=19)          None to date                                    68% Neutral                            39%
          PGY-3               19% (n=11)          Other                                            7% Uncomfortable                      29%
                                                                                                      Very uncomfortable                  2%
                                                                                                      Respondents who expect to integrate
                                                  Respondents view of benefits of telemedicine        telemedicine into future practice
                                                  Improved patient outcomes                       21% Strongly agree                     36%
                                                  stronger physician-patient relationship         39% Agree                              36%
                                                  access to data (e.g. home measuremen            43% Neutral                            18%
                                                  improved efficiency                             63% Disagree                            9%
                                                  better access for patients                      80% Strongly disagree                   2%
                                                  Respondents view of barriers to using telemedicine
                                                  Providers lack of familarity with the
                                                  technology                                      55%
                                                  Weaker physician-patient relationship           46%
                                                  Too difficult for my patients to use            63%
                                                  Lack of time to implement care                  11%
                                                  Privacy concerns                                18%
                                                  Reimbursement concerns                          38%
                                                  Documentation concerns                          29%
                                                  Other: lack of full physical exam               14%
                                                                                                                                       12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211136.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                       It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          Table 2. Resident post-participation survey responses 12 weeks after starting the
          telemedicine curriculum (N = 43)
                                                                                  I learned new knowledge and      I found the material in this
                                                Overall, I was satisfied with     skills from the telemedicine     learning activity to be relevant
           Responses                            this learning activity.           curriculum.                      and up-to-date.
           Current PGY year       %             Strongly Agree             25.6%  Strongly Agree             18.6% Strongly Agree             32.6%
           PGY-1            25.6% (n=11)        Agree                      44.2%  Agree                      48.8% Agree                      51.2%
           PGY-2            27.9% (n=12)        Neutral                    23.3%  Neutral                    27.9% Neutral                    14.0%
           PGY-3            46.5% (n=20)        Disagree                     4.7% Disagree                    2.3% Disagree                    0.0%
                                                Strongly Disagree            2.3% Strongly Disagree           2.3% Strongly Disagree           2.3%
                                                                                  I will be able to apply the
                                                I would recommend this            knowledge and skills learned     The content was relevant to
                                                learning activity to others.      for future encounters.           my job-related needs.
                                                Strongly Agree             27.9%  Strongly Agree             30.2% Strongly Agree             32.6%
                                                Agree                      44.2%  Agree                      53.5% Agree                      55.8%
                                                Neutral                    20.9%  Neutral                    11.6% Neutral                     7.0%
                                                Disagree                     4.7% Disagree                    2.3% Disagree                    4.7%
                                                Strongly Disagree            2.3% Strongly Disagree           2.3% Strongly Disagree           0.0%
                                                The learning activities and/or
                                                materials were effective in       The scope of the material was
                                                helping me learn the content.     appropriate for my needs.
                                                Strongly Agree             21.4%  Strongly Agree             25.6%
                                                Agree                      57.1%  Agree                      55.8%
                                                Neutral                    16.7%  Neutral                    11.6%
                                                Disagree                     4.8% Disagree                    4.7%
                                                Strongly Disagree            0.0% Strongly Disagree           2.3%
                                                                                                                                           13
