medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Title: Local and Distant responses to single pulse electrical stimulation reflect different
    forms of connectivity
    Authors' names and affiliations
    Britni Crockera,b, Lauren Ostrowski b, Ziv M. Williamsc, Darin D. Doughertyd, Emad N.
    Eskandarc,e, Alik S. Widged,f,g, Catherine J. Chu b, Sydney S. Cashb*, Angelique C. Paulkb,c*
    a
     Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, Institute for Medical Engineering and Science,
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139
    b
        Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
    c
     Nayef Al-Rodhan Laboratories, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital
    and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
    d
     Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
    Charlestown, MA, 02129.
    e
     present address: Department of Neurosurgery, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore
    Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467
    f
     Picower Institute for Learning & Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
    MA 02124.
    g
        present address: Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
    Corresponding Author
    Angelique C Paulk: apaulk@mgh.harvard.edu
    Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest
    None

    Key Words
    Direct electrical stimulation, connectivity, diffusion tensor imaging, sEEG, intracranial




        NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.   1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Abstract

    Background: Measuring connectivity in the human brain can involve innumerable approaches

    using both noninvasive (fMRI, EEG) and invasive (intracranial EEG or iEEG) recording

    modalities, including the use of external probing stimuli, such as direct electrical stimulation.

    Objective/Hypothesis: To examine how different measures of connectivity correlate with one

    another, we compared ‘passive’ measures of connectivity during resting state conditions map to

    the more ‘active’ probing measures of connectivity with single pulse electrical stimulation

    (SPES).

    Methods: We measured the network engagement and spread of the cortico-cortico evoked

    potential (CCEP) induced by SPES at 53 total sites across the brain, including cortical and

    subcortical regions, in patients with intractable epilepsy (N=11) who were undergoing

    intracranial recordings as a part of their clinical care for identifying seizure onset zones. We

    compared the CCEP network to functional, effective, and structural measures of connectivity

    during a resting state in each patient. Functional and effective connectivity measures included

    correlation or Granger causality measures applied to stereoEEG (sEEGs) recordings. Structural

    connectivity was derived from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) acquired before intracranial

    electrode implant and monitoring (N=8).

    Results: The CCEP network was most similar to the resting state voltage correlation network in

    channels near to the stimulation location. In contrast, the distant CCEP network was most similar

    to the DTI network. Other connectivity measures were not as similar to the CCEP network.




                                                                                                                                       2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Conclusions: These results demonstrate that different connectivity measures, including those

    derived from active stimulation-based probing, measure different, complementary aspects of

    regional interrelationships in the brain.

    Introduction

               Brain connectivity measures are a popular approach to quantify brain networks and the

    inter-regional coupling between brain areas. Typically, brain network estimates are categorized

    into three distinct types: functional, effective, and structural [1]. Functional connectivity

    identifies channels or brain regions with correlated activity, and is measured in the neural signal,

    such as in the local field potential (LFP), using methods such as correlation, cross-correlation,

    and magnitude-squared coherence [2]. Effective connectivity identifies whether channels or

    brain regions may have causal influence on one another and includes methods such as weighted

    phase lag index and Granger causality [1]. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) allows for estimates

    of structural connectivity by measuring the anisotropy of water molecules, allowing for a partial

    reconstruction of the white matter tracts in the brain [3]. All of these measures of connectivity

    can occur without external stimuli or perturbations to the system.

               In contrast, connectivity measures derived from cortico-cortical evoked potentials

    (CCEPs) involve external perturbations to the system in which evoked potentials are elicited by

    direct intracranial single pulse electrical stimulation [4,5]. CCEPs can be used to estimate the

    connectivity of multiple different cortical areas [4–13]. CCEP connectivity is dynamic and can

    reveal changes related to state of consciousness [14] or underlying pathology [13,15,16].

    Importantly, CCEPs are not symmetric in their waveform nor spatial spread and can therefore be

    used to create directed network graphs [17–19]. Thus, CCEPs offer many advantages over

    available tools for estimating brain networks. In a recent study using data from hundreds of


                                                                                                                                       3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    individuals, researchers found there was a significant correlation between distance from the

    recording site and both the latency of the CCEP waveform and identified probability

    connectivity networks [9].

               Within the theoretical framework of brain network categorization, it has been

    hypothesized that CCEP networks represent functional or effective connectivity [4,9,20]. CCEP

    networks do correspond with other functional connectivity measures, such as resting state high

    gamma coherence on electrocorticography (ECoG; [19]) and resting state functional magnetic

    resonance imaging (fMRI; [21]). Diffusion tractography has been shown to correlate with CCEP

    networks in the language system [7] and has been used to predict changes in post-stimulus brain

    activity [22]. Here, we test the similarities between CCEP connectivity estimates and six

    common estimates of brain connectivity, including 3 measures of functional connectivity

    (correlation, cross-correlation, magnitude square coherence), 2 measures of effective

    connectivity (Granger causality, phase lag index) and a robust measure of structural connectivity

    (probabilistic tractography). We find a significant similarity between CCEPs and all coupling

    measures that persists even after distance correction, suggesting the CCEPs are a reliable

    measure of brain connectivity. However, the degree to which the measures correlate with the

    CCEP is dependent on distance and type of connectivity measure.

    Methods

    Data Collection

               Neurophysiological data was recorded from 11 patients (6 females and 5 males) of ages

    19 to 57 (mean 36.9, std 12.5) undergoing invasive monitoring for intractable epilepsy using

    bilateral intracranial depth electrodes. Depth electrodes (Ad-tech Medical, Racine WI, USA, or



                                                                                                                                       4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    PMT, Chanhassen, MN, USA) had diameters of 0.8–1.0 mm and consisted of 8-16

    platinum/iridium-contacts 1-2.4 mm long. The placement of these electrodes was determined

    solely by clinical criteria, with most electrodes in the frontal or temporal lobe. All patients

    provided informed consent to participate in any experiments, which were approved by the

    Massachusetts General Hospital Institutional Review Board and the Massachusetts Institute of

    Technology Committee On the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects following the National

    Institutes of Health and Army Human Research Protection Office guidelines.

               Voltage data from implanted electrodes were recorded at a sampling rate of 2000 Hz

    using a Neural Signal Processor system (Blackrock, Inc.). In addition to these

    electrophysiological recordings, each patient underwent a T1-weighted structural magnetic

    resonance imaging (MRI) scan which was coregistered to the post-operative computed

    tomography (CT) scan to identify electrode locations [23,24]. Distance between channels is

    defined as the Euclidean distance between the average locations for each bipolar electrode pair.

    Stimulation

               To evoke cortico-cortical evoked potentials (CCEPs), biphasic bipolar single pulses of

    stimulation were applied across pairs of adjacent electrodes with a 90us pulse width and a 53us

    inter-pulse interval at 6 or 7 mA (Figure 1A). This stimulus strength was chosen as one that has

    been previously reported to evoke CCEPs while remaining low enough to avoid afterdischarges

    [17]. These pulses were delivered by the Blackrock CereStim stimulator at 3-second intervals

    with +/- 500 ms random jitter with uniform distribution and at an amplitude below the threshold,

    above which stimulation would induce afterdischarges or for any perceptual or behavior effects

    reported by the patients. In one participant, these single pulses were delivered interspersed

    between other trains of stimulation. The number of trials ranged from 20 to 337 (mean 47), and


                                                                                                                                       5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    stimulation occurred in one to nine sites per participant. The stimulation sites were not in the

    seizure onset zone or areas where early seizure activity spreads for any patient, and all

    stimulation experiments were performed while the patients were awake, after the patients

    resumed antiepileptic medication, and were under medical supervision.

    CCEP Networks

               To estimate CCEP networks, recordings were first analyzed using custom software in

    MATLAB (Mathworks; Natick, MA). The data were re-referenced using a bipolar reference

    scheme between neighboring electrodes then divided into 2-second epochs time-locked to the

    delivery of the stimulus, including one second pre- and one second post-stimulation. Any peri-

    stimulus data within 3 ms of the stimulation pulse were excluded from analysis, before and after

    the stimulus. All channels and trials were visually inspected for artifacts, and any channels or

    trials with large artifacts were excluded from analysis. In the one second following stimulation,

    the voltage recordings for each channel were averaged across trials and then normalized by the

    standard deviation of the voltage in the one second before stimulation (Figure 1Aiii). CCEP

    responses were quantified per bipolar recording by the maximum absolute amplitude of the

    average evoked potential in this normalized signal [21].

               These CCEP responses constitute a one-dimensional CCEP network representing the

    connectivity between the stimulation site and each recording channel. Stimulation at some sites

    failed to produce a response in any recording channels. To avoid constructing or comparing

    empty CCEP networks, stimulation sites were only included in analysis if CCEPs greater than 6

    standard deviations above baseline could be measured in any recording channels. Since CCEP

    responses can be asymmetric, these one-dimensional CCEP networks are to be understood as

    directed networks from the stimulation site to the recording sites (Figure 1A).


                                                                                                                                       6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




               We then compared the CCEP network to other connectivity metrics (see Network

    Comparisons section). Two networks could share many connections between nodes and still be

    dissimilar due to a mismatch in the density of connections. To help distinguish this case from

    completely dissimilar networks, we compared the average network strength between channels

    that had either “above-threshold” or “below-threshold” CCEP responses. A threshold of 6

    standard deviations above baseline was chosen to separate above-threshold and below-threshold

    CCEP responses measured in the method described above [17,21].

    Functional Connectivity Calculations

               For functional connectivity estimates, 5 minutes of recordings while the participants were

    awake before or after single pulse stimulation sessions were used (Figure 1A-B). These data

    were re-referenced with the same bipolar reference scheme, then bandpass filtered from 1-150

    Hz and notch filtered from 58-62 Hz and 118-122 Hz (Butterworth 3rd order, forward and

    reverse). The recordings were then split contiguously into 1-second epochs. As above, channels

    and trials identified by visual inspection as having large artifacts were excluded from further

    analysis.

               Correlation and cross-correlation measures were used as estimates of functional

    connectivity in the time domain. For each 1-second epoch, the correlation and maximum cross-

    correlation with lags between +/- 250 ms were calculated between the stimulation electrode pairs

    and all other electrode pairs. For each channel pair, the above-chance threshold of connectivity

    was determined using a bootstrap method: independently shuffling epochs (with replacement)

    10,000 times to destroy the temporal relationship between epochs, then choosing the values at

    the 2.5th and 97.5th percentile. Then the final network was determined as the percentage of times




                                                                                                                                       7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    each correlation or cross-correlation rose above this random chance threshold, yielding values

    between 0 and 1 [25,26].

               Similarly, magnitude-squared coherence was used as an estimate of functional

    connectivity in the frequency domain. For each 1-second epoch, magnitude-squared coherence

    was calculated for each frequency from 1 to 150 Hz between stimulation electrode pairs and all

    other electrode pairs. Again, for each epoch, a 5% threshold was calculated using the above

    bootstrap method, and the final network for each frequency was given by the percentage of times

    each MS-coherence estimate rose above the 5% threshold, yielding values between 0 and 1.

    Effective Connectivity Calculations

               For effective connectivity estimates, the same 5 minutes of recording were used with the

    same bipolar reference scheme as for functional connectivity. For pairwise Granger causality

    estimates, these recordings were split contiguously into 1-second epochs and then decimated

    from 2000 Hz to 250 Hz in order to reduce computational time. Pairwise Granger causality was

    estimated using the multivariate Granger causality toolbox [27] with a model order of 10,

    between every recording channel and the stimulation channel for each stimulation site. Pairwise

    Granger causality networks are directed networks and were therefore computed in both

    directions: from each stimulation site to every recording site, and from every recording site to

    each stimulation site. Weighted phase lag indices were calculated from 4 to 50 Hz with the

    FieldTrip toolbox using 2-second contiguous epochs in order to capture lower frequency

    networks [28,29].

    Structural Connectivity Calculations




                                                                                                                                       8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




               Diffusion tensor imaging was acquired heterogeneously across 8 of 11 participants

    included in this data set, with b-values of 700 (1 participant), 1000 (3 participants), and 2000 (4

    participants) and number of directions ranging from 28 to 74. Structural connectivity between

    two regions was determined using the FDT toolbox [30,31]. First, we used BEDPOSTx

    (Bayesian Estimation of Diffusion Parameters Obtained using Sampling Techniques for

    modelling Crossing Fibres) to locally model the diffusion parameters (Figure 1A-C). The

    average coordinates of the bipolar electrode pairs from the structural imaging were transformed

    into diffusion-space using the transformation matrix obtained by coregistration of the structural

    MRI and the diffusion MRI with FLIRT [32–34]. These transformed coordinates were then used

    to generate binary masks of spheres of 1-centimeter radius centered on each channel [35]. For

    each stimulation site, probtrackx2 was then used to calculate the number of streamlines (inferred

    fiber tracts) from the seed mask to the target mask, with the target mask as both a waypoint and a

    termination mask (Figure 1C). This process was repeated for the stimulation mask as seed mask

    and recording mask as target mask (generating streamlines from the stimulation channel to the

    recording channel) and for the stimulation mask as target mask and the recording mask as seed

    mask (generating streamlines from the recording channel to the stimulation channel). The

    number of streamlines was then normalized by the total mask volume in order to generate a value

    for structural connectivity.

    Network Comparisons

               Every set of connectivity estimates generated for each stimulation site could be

    represented as a row in the total weighted adjacency matrix of the complete connectivity matrix

    across channels for each participant (Figure 1iv). Since participants had an unequal number of

    stimulation sites, we computed the similarity of connectivity estimates for each row (i.e. each


                                                                                                                                       9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    stimulation site). To compare CCEP networks to other network estimates, we calculated the

    similarity score between two networks as the Pearson’s correlation between the two vectors.

    Unless otherwise noted, all significance calculations are uncorrected t-tests of the Fisher-

    transformed correlation coefficients – two-sided when comparing two methods, or one-sided

    when comparing to zero. Confidence intervals were determined using bootstrap-resampling over

    1000 iterations.

               Distance is a strong confound when comparing any brain connectivity networks, since

    areas close together are much more likely to be connected [26]. When controlling for distance,

    we used a partial correlation to compute similarity between two networks. The least squares

    linear regression is computed between each 1D network and the reciprocal of distance squared;

    the distance-controlled similarity between the two networks is then the correlation of the

    residuals from each of these regressions.

    Results

              We recorded corticocortical evoked potentials (CCEPs) induced by single pulse

    intracranial direct electrical stimulation at 53 total sites across 11 participants with intractable

    epilepsy implanted with stereo-encephalography electrodes for the purposes of monitoring neural

    activity as part of their clinical care. Sites were largely in prefrontal and temporal cortices. The

    spread of the CCEP across recording sites was quantified (see Methods) and arranged into one-

    dimensional CCEP networks (Figure 1Aiv). To determine whether these CCEP networks

    reliably reflect functional, effective, or structural connectivity, we then compared the voltage

    response spread of CCEPs to a battery of measures which reflect each of these three types of

    connectivity (see Methods). For this reason, in addition to voltage and spectral connectivity




                                                                                                                                     10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    measures, we compared the stimulation responses to preoperative diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)

    to perform a partial reconstruction of the white matter tracts in a subset of participants (N=8).

    Functional Connectivity

    Correlation networks: Correlation-derived connectivity patterns from neural activity during rest

    (outside of periods of stimulation) shared substantial similarities to the CCEP network. Across

    the 53 stimulation sites, correlation networks corresponded to CCEP networks with an average

    similarity score of 0.50 ± 0.24 std (Figure 2A). This relationship was reflected in the data;

    channels with an above-threshold response to stimulation had an average absolute correlation of

    0.20 ± 0.18 std to the stimulation channel at rest, compared to 0.037 ± 0.045 std in channels with

    no response to stimulation (Figure 2B). The relatively high variance of correlation among

    stimulation-responsive channels suggests that correlation may not be useful for predicting

    whether there would be a CCEP or not, but the large difference between above-threshold and

    below-threshold channels suggests that correlation is reasonably specific to whether there was an

    above-threshold response at all.

    Cross-correlation networks: Cross-correlation-derived connectivity patterns are significantly

    less similar to the CCEP network than correlation (p = 1.5e-08). Across 53 stimulation sites,

    cross-correlation networks had an average similarity score of 0.28 ± 0.22 std with CCEP

    networks (Figure 2A). Channels with above-threshold CCEPs had a normalized cross-

    correlation of 0.34 ± 0.069 std to the stimulation channel at rest, compared to 0.3000 ± 0.041 std

    in channels which were below threshold (Figure 2B). While cross-correlation was on average

    higher in channels with above-threshold CCEPs compared to correlation, cross-correlation

    networks still were less similar than correlation networks to CCEP networks. This decrease in

    correspondence between the cross-correlation networks and CCEP networks was caused by the


                                                                                                                                     11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    relatively high cross-correlation values between channels which were below the CCEP threshold

    (indicating non-CCEP responsive locations) and the stimulation channel.

              In addition to examining the cross-correlation relationships, we examined whether there

    was a consistent relationship between cross correlation lag and the CCEP network. We found a

    non-significant (p = 0.09, 2-sample F test to compare variances) decrease in lag in channel pairs

    in the CCEP network versus channels not in the CCEP network (data not shown). This

    difference completely disappeared when we compared only channels with a reasonably high

    cross correlation value (>0.2), so this trend could just be due to the association between CCEP

    magnitude and cross-correlation listed above.

    Coherence networks: The similarity between magnitude-squared-coherence-derived networks

    and CCEP networks was computed over a range of frequencies, with the best agreement

    occurring at approximately 8 Hz (Figure 2C). At 8 Hz, coherence networks corresponded to

    CCEP networks with an average similarity score of 0.40 ± 0.25 std (Figure 2C), which was

    significantly better than cross-correlation and worse than correlation (p = 1.4e-04 and 1.2e-05,

    respectively, t-test). Across all frequencies up to 100 Hz, the lower bound of the uncorrected

    95% confidence interval for network similarity was above zero. Like correlation, channels with

    above-threshold CCEPs showed a larger coherence with the stimulation channel than channels

    with responses below threshold (Figure 2D).

    Effective Connectivity

    Granger causality: Pairwise Granger causality is a directed measure of connectivity, yielding

    directional estimates of connectivity from the stimulation channel to the recording channel and

    vice versa. Across the 53 stimulation sites, we calculated the pairwise Granger causality for

    neural data during rest outside of stimulation and compared this measure to the CCEP networks


                                                                                                                                     12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    per stimulation site. Pairwise Granger causality networks from the stimulation channel

    corresponded to CCEP networks with an average similarity score of 0.38 ± 0.27, while pairwise

    Granger causality networks from the recording channel corresponded to CCEP networks with an

    average similarity score of 0.34 ± 0.28 std (Figure 3A). No significant difference was found

    between the two groups (p = 0.39). Channels with above-threshold CCEPs had higher resting

    state Granger causality values with the stimulation channel at resting state (0.014 ± 0.019 std

    from the stimulation channel, and 0.017 ± 0.0120 std from the recording channel) than the

    remaining channels (0.0050 ± 0.012 std from the stimulation channel, and 0.0061 ± 0.014 std

    from the recording channel; Figure 3B). Overall, these similarities are significantly smaller than

    the functional connectivity correlation similarities (p = 8.0e-4 and 4.1e-04; t-test).

    Phase-lag index: In another test of effective (directional) connectivity, the similarity between

    weighted-phase-lag-index-derived networks during rest and CCEP networks was computed over

    a range of frequencies, with the best agreement occurring around 30 Hz (Figure 3C). While the

    lower bound of the uncorrected 95% was higher than zero at all frequencies tested, overall the

    agreement between weighted phase lag index connectivity and the CCEP network was poor, and

    the highest similarity score is 0.10 ± 0.15 std. Examining the individual values, the average

    weighted phase lag indices between the stimulation site and channels with above-threshold

    CCEPs were higher than between the stimulation site and channels with below-threshold

    responses, particularly in the 1-10 Hz and 25-35 Hz ranges, but the variability was also very high

    (Figure 3D).

    Structural Connectivity

    Probabilistic tractography: Preoperative diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was conducted in a

    subset of participants where the networks were calculated between the area around each


                                                                                                                                     13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    stimulation site and the areas around the brain locations of the recording channels for a total of

    34 stimulation sites across 8 participants. Across 34 stimulation sites, CCEP networks had a

    higher average similarity to structural networks than any of the functional networks tested, with

    tractography networks from the stimulation channel to the recording channel averaging a

    similarity score of 0.68 ± 0.21 std and tractography networks from the recording channel to the

    stimulation channel averaging a similarity score of 0.67 ± 0.23 std (Figure 4A). There was no

    statistically significant difference between the stimulation channel to the recording channel

    group and the recording channel to the stimulation channel (p = 0.51; t-test). Further, CCEP were

    more similar to structural networks than to correlation networks (paired t-test using the subset of

    participants with diffusion tensor imaging, p = 3.4e-09 and p = 3.6e-08, respectively). Channels

    with above-threshold CCEPs had an average normalized tract percentage of 0.41 ± 0.29 std from

    the stimulation channel to the recording channel and 0.40 ± 0.31 std from the recording channel

    to the stimulation channel, compared to 0.019 ± 0.072 std and 0.017 ± 0.069 in the remaining,

    below-threshold responsive channels (Figure 4B).

    Controlling for Distance

               All these estimates of connectivity share a common cofounding factor – distance from the

    recording channel to the stimulation channel. Correcting for distance using a partial correlation

    approach substantially lowered the similarity between CCEP networks and the other measures

    across the board (Figure 5). Still, all connectivity estimates except weighted phase lag indices

    maintained a significant similarity to CCEP networks even when corrected for distance. While

    uncorrected network similarity showed DTI as significantly more similar to CCEP networks than

    correlation, corrected similarity measures between these two methods were no longer




                                                                                                                                     14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    significantly different (p = 0.30 for tractography from the stimulation channel and p = 0.19 for

    tractography to the stimulation channel).

               Though the similarity scores decreased when correcting for distance, distance did not

    have a homogenous effect across connectivity metrics. Subdividing the recording channels into

    local (within 3cm of the stimulation site) and distant (further than 3cm from the stimulation site)

    groups revealed that functional and effective connectivity estimates during rest corresponded

    best with the CCEP networks at local channels, while structural connectivity metrics

    demonstrated similar relations to stimulation responses at both local and distant channels (Figure

    6). The method with the highest similarity to the local CCEP networks was correlation, and the

    method with the highest similarity to the distant channel CCEP networks was DTI from the

    stimulation site to the recording site (Figure 6). Breaking the functional connectivity down into

    its frequency components with magnitude-squared coherence, the high beta and gamma

    frequency bands were not similar to distant channel CCEP networks, with mean similarity values

    close to zero.




    Discussion

               We systematically compared CCEP networks to functional, effective, and structural

    connectivity networks. Comparisons where we did not control for distance suggest that

    structural connectivity derived through diffusion tractography was the strongest correlate of

    connectivity represented by the CCEP network. However, controlling for distance abolished the

    advantage of structural connectivity above functional and effective estimation methods. By

    segmenting channels into two groups – local and distant – we showed that, even controlling for




                                                                                                                                     15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    distance, structural connectivity is the most similar to distant CCEP spread while local CCEP

    networks reflect functional connectivity measures.

               Uncorrected functional connectivity metrics showed a reasonable similarity to CCEP

    connectivity. Of this group, cross-correlation showed the least similarity to CCEPs, even though

    cross-correlation has been used to demonstrate stable networks in EEG across time [25]. Unlike

    the assumption of simultaneity under correlation, cross-correlation is based on a more plausible

    biophysical assumption, that two connected regions may lag each other in activity. However, the

    inclusion of a variable lag within a relatively large window increased the noise of the estimation

    by raising the floor of possible values. Thus, cross-correlation found many connections between

    channels that did not respond to stimulation. Magnitude-squared coherence showed the highest

    similarity in spatial distribution to CCEPs in the 10-20 Hz range, consistent with the notion that

    lower frequency oscillations are more spatially distributed and more dependent on white matter

    connections than high frequency oscillations [36–38].

               Despite categorization of stimulation as a measure of effective connectivity, the effective

    connectivity measures chosen here were overall less similar to CCEP networks than functional

    and structural connectivity measures. This conclusion was also found in another study comparing

    Granger causality, cross correlation, and the CCEP network [39]. Weighted phase lag index fared

    particularly poorly in our hands, though both measures tended to under-identify channels that

    would be responsive to stimulation. Though Granger causality is a directed measure of

    connectivity, direction seemed to matter little in corresponding to the CCEP network. This lack

    of difference could be because stimulation may activate white matter tracts in both orthodromic

    and antidromic directions, or it could be due to the high degree of reciprocal connections

    between cortical areas [4,16,40,41]. Indeed, stimulation location relative to the grey and white


                                                                                                                                     16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    matter should be taken into account in future work, as it has been demonstrated that white matter

    stimulation induces more widespread network responses with depth electrodes [9].

               A possible confound of this work and comparisons to other studies, however, is that all

    the data included here involves stimulation from sEEG, intraparenchymal electrodes in different

    regions of cortical and subcortical locations. While there has been work on the physiology of

    stimulation responses from intraparenychymal electrodes (particularly with respect to DBS for

    movement disorders), there still remain many questions about the relationship between brain

    responses to stimulation on the pial surface versus stimulation inside the cortex. Undoubtedly,

    the location of the stimulation has a substantial impact on which neural elements are modulated.

    Notably, much of the recent work involving characterizing CCEPs and their consistent waveform

    characteristics to date have been on CCEPs induced by stimulation via superficial grid

    electrodes, particularly in the investigation of involved neural networks [4,8,8,16] and as related

    to underlying white matter tracts and brain states [22]. However, this current study represents

    one of but a few to explicitly explore the relationship between stimulation of both cortical and

    subcortical structures and connectivity. This remains an important point as there is speculation

    that CCEPs are a representation of network interactions between cortical and subcortical

    pathways as opposed to a purely local or cortical evoked population response induced via white

    matter connections [42–44].

               In estimates of similarity not controlling for distance, connectivity based on diffusion

    tractography imaging (DTI) was most similar to connectivity based on CCEPs. DTI is also a

    directed measure of connectivity, though in practice the directions differed very little from each

    other because diffusion happens in both orthodromic and antidromic directions along axons.

    Mechanistically, stimulation is thought to primarily excite axons [45,46], so the agreement


                                                                                                                                     17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    between CCEP spread from electrical stimulation and structural connectivity was perhaps not

    surprising. Still, it is important to note that both CCEPs and DTI shared a common cofounding

    factor – distance from the stimulation site [46]. In addition, practical limitations of collecting

    data in the clinical setting resulted in heterogeneous DTI data collection parameters; higher

    quality data set may improve results.

               After correcting for distance, the landscape changed dramatically. Weighted phase lag

    index was the only metric, of the ones we tested, to no longer be significantly similar to CCEP

    networks after distance correction. Coherence in the gamma band was relatively unaffected by

    distance corrections, which could be due to its relatively constrained spatial distribution in the

    first place. While estimates before correcting for distance had DTI most similar to CCEP

    networks, distance correction abolished this advantage. There was no statistically measurable

    difference in distance-corrected similarity between DTI, correlation, Granger causality, and

    coherence in all bands except delta and gamma. These results would seem to indicate that, once

    corrected for distance, many methods of estimating connectivity perform reasonably similarly in

    predicting stimulation response. This is perhaps why these various measures have been used to

    show that CCEP can reflect functional and effective connectivity in the brain in past studies

    [17,20,39].

               However, overall comparable distance-corrected similarity scores did not mean that this

    similarity was homogenously applicable across the entire pool of channels across the brain.

    Segmenting the channels into two groups by distance to the stimulation site revealed that

    structural connectivity was more robust as one gets further away from the stimulation site, even

    after correcting for distance. On the other hand, correlation again rose to the top as being most

    similar to channels closest to the stimulation site. Structural connectivity may have failed to


                                                                                                                                     18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    predict local responsive channels because of its poor spatial resolution. Though MRI as a

    modality has much higher spatial sampling than sEEG, diffusion tractography requires the

    creation of reasonably large regions of interest as seed and target masks (up to 1 cm in diameter),

    limiting its utility in estimating connectivity of overlapping ROIs. On the other hand, correlation

    and coherence, particularly in the higher frequencies, are known to drop off dramatically with

    distance in the cortex [47]. Our results affirm that different methods may be more appropriate

    within specific spatial regimes. In addition, as there is evidence that the CCEP network is

    different depending on the brain region [9,16,22], future work with more widespread and

    repeated sampling across brain regions could help resolve if there are regional differences in the

    similarities between these metrics and the CCEP network. Of course, an added dimension is

    comparison of these connectivity metrics during other conditions (and not just during resting

    state) such as a language task or other activities [39] could illuminate further whether these

    metrics and their similarity to the CCEP network map to state and state transitions as opposed to

    just brain region or distance [22].

               Our results suggest that structural connectivity methods produce very similar networks to

    those derived by single pulse electrical stimulation. However, this similarity was driven in large

    part due to the underlying relationship between distance and connectivity. This relationship is

    likely due to a variety of factors, including volume conduction, the cumulative probability of

    terminating a tract, and the underlying tendency of brain regions to form both physical and

    functional connectivity with neighboring areas. Still, distance-corrected connectivity was more

    suited for the purposes of determining which non-invasive methods of connectivity estimation

    may help predict the effects of stimulation. Taken together, our results indicate that many

    methods may suffice, though functional and effective methods seemed particularly well-suited



                                                                                                                                     19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    for predicting local stimulation effects and this relationship could be crucial when designing

    stimulation paradigms for clinical and research purposes.

    Acknowledgments

    We would like to especially thank the patients who participated for their time and help. We thank

    Erica Johnson, Gavin Belok, Kara Farnes, and Mia Borzello for technical assistance, particularly

    in the MRI reconstruction and registration, and Enterprise Research Infrastructure & Services at

    Partners Healthcare for their in-depth support and for the provision of the ERISOne Linux

    Computing Cluster. This work was supported by NINDS-K24 [K24-NS088568-01A1]; the Tiny

    Blue Dot Foundation; and the United States Department of Energy Computational Sciences

    Graduate Fellowship [DE-FG02-97ER25308] to BC. This research was sponsored by the U.S.

    Army Research Office and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under

    Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-14-2-0045 issued by ARO contracting office in

    support of DARPA’s SUBNETS Program. The views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are

    those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies of

    the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.




                                                                                                                                     20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figures




    Figure 1: an overview of how networks are computed and compared. First Column (i).

    reconstruction in one representative participant of data collection by stimulating one channel and

    recording the others (A), recording neurophysiological signals at rest in all channels (B), or

    collecting diffusion tensor imaging (C). In the first two panels of column i, channel locations are

    shown in the 3-D reconstruction of the pial surface from structural MRI, with the stimulation

    channel marked in red and one of the recording channels marked in green. B.Second Column (ii)

    schematic representations of the three data collection methods. For CCEP networks, one channel

    is stimulated and the others are recorded. For functional and effective networks, all channels are

    recorded. For structural networks, the channel locations are used to create regions of interest


                                                                                                                                     21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    (ROIs) for both seed and target masks; tractography is then computed between pairs of ROIs.

    C.Third Column (iii) representative data samples for each type of data collection method. An

    example CCEP is shown in row A. Resting state electrophysiology is shown in both the

    stimulation channel (red) and a non-stimulation channel (green) before the stimulation

    experiment in row B. In row C, the ROI created from the stimulation channel location (red) and

    a non-stimulation channel (green) is shown overlaid on the structural MRI. The tract between

    the two ROIs is highlighted in white. D. example networks. Last Column (iv) from each

    network construction method overlaid on representative anatomy. Bluer lines represent weaker

    pairwise connections between the stimulation channel or ROI and all other channels or ROIs,

    while yellower lines represent stronger connections. Similarity scores are then calculated as the

    correlation between a given network, transformed into a vector, and the CCEP network, also

    transformed into a vector.




                                                                                                                                     22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 2: Functional connectivity networks show similarity to stimulation-evoked

    networks. A. Boxplots showing the medians and confidence bounds of the similarity scores

    between correlation or cross-correlation networks and CCEPs for different stimulation sites. B.

    the average correlation and normalized cross-correlation values for all channels with (blue) or

    without (green) an above-threshold CCEP. Uncorrected confidence intervals (black error bars)

    were determined by naive bootstrap resampling. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. C.

    the mean (black) similarity across the 34 stimulation sites for magnitude-squared coherence

    networks and CCEP networks at each frequency, and the uncorrected 95% confidence intervals

    at each frequency (grey) determined by naïve bootstrap resampling. D. The average

    unnormalized magnitude-squared coherence for all channels with (blue) or without (green) an

    above-threshold CCEP, with the same threshold as in B. Uncorrected confidence intervals (error

    bars) were determined by naive bootstrap resampling.




                                                                                                                                     23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 3: Effective connectivity shows less similarity to stimulation-evoked networks. A.

    boxplots showing the medians and confidence bounds of the similarity scores between pairwise

    Granger causality networks in both directions and CCEPs across 34 for different stimulation

    sites. Pairwise Granger causality is a directed measure of connectivity, so calculations from the

    stimulation site to the recording channel and from the recording channel to the stimulation site

    are both represented. B. The average unnormalized pairwise granger causality values for all

    channels with (blue) or without (green) an above-threshold CCEP. The presence of a CCEP is

    defined as any average evoked potential that reaches an absolute value at least 6 standard

    deviations above baseline mean. Uncorrected confidence intervals (black error bars) were

    determined by naive bootstrap resampling. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. Every

    measure of connectivity has its own scale, so absolute values are not as important as the

    difference between the two groups. C. The mean (black) similarity across the 34 stimulation

    sites for weighted phase lag index networks and CCEP networks at each frequency, and the

    uncorrected 95% confidence intervals at each frequency (grey) determined by naïve bootstrap

    resampling. D. The average weighted phase lag index for all channels with (blue) or without


                                                                                                                                     24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    (green) an above-threshold CCEP, with the same threshold as in B. Uncorrected confidence

    intervals (error bars) were determined by naive bootstrap resampling. Every measure of

    connectivity has its own scale, so absolute values are not as important as the difference between

    the two groups.




                                                                                                                                     25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 4. Structural connectivity shows high similarity to stimulation-evoked networks. A.

    Boxplots showing the medians and confidence bounds of the similarity scores diffusion tensor

    imaging networks between stimulation sites and recording sites in both directions and CCEP

    networks across 34 for different stimulation sites. Diffusion tensor imaging tractography is a

    directed measure of connectivity, so calculations from the stimulation site to the recording

    channel and from the recording channel to the stimulation site are both represented. B. The

    average unnormalized DTI connectivity streamline count for all channels with (blue) or without

    (green) an above-threshold CCEP. The presence of a CCEP is defined as any average evoked

    potential that reaches an absolute value at least 6 standard deviations above baseline mean.

    Uncorrected confidence intervals (black error bars) were determined by naive bootstrap

    resampling. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                     26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




                                                                                                                                     27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 5: Network measures used in this paper share distance as a confounding factor. A-

    D show the relationship between a few selected measures and the Euclidian distance between the

    stimulation channel and the recording channel. A. A scatter plot of the normalized absolute peak

    in the 250 ms post-stimulation (CCEP) at the recording channel and distance from the

    stimulation channel. B. A scatter plot of the correlation of the recording channel and the

    stimulation channel and distance between those channels. C. A scatter plot of mean normalized

    magnitude coherence in the 8-12 Hz range between the recording and the stimulation channels

    and distance between those channels. D. A scatter plot of the normalized diffusion tensor

    imaging tractography strength and the Euclidean distance between the recording and stimulation

    channels. E-G. The average similarity between CCEP networks and the indicated connectivity

    measure (E: various metrics, F: magnitude-squared coherence across frequency bands, G:

    weighted phase lag index across frequency bands) without (black bars) or with (grey) distance

    correction across 34 stimulation sites. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean.

    Method labels: distance (dist), correlation (corr), cross-correlation (xcorr), pairwise granger

    causality (pwgc), and diffusion tensor imaging tractography (dti). Frequency bands: 1-4 Hz

    (delta), 4-8 Hz (theta), 8-12 Hz (alpha), 15-20 Hz (beta1), 20-30 Hz (beta2), 30-50 Hz (gamma).

    Significance thresholds: p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**), p < 0.001 (***), p < 0.0001 (****).




                                                                                                                                     28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 6: Network similarity for local and distant channels relative to the stimulation site.

    A-B. The mean distance-corrected similarity between CCEP networks and the indicated

    connectivity measure across 34 stimulation sites when channels are split by distance to the

    stimulation site into two groups: local (dark blue) or distant (orange). Local channels are within

    3cm of the stimulation channel, as measured by Euclidean distance, and distant channels are

    outside that radius. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean. Method labels: distance

    (dist), correlation (corr), cross-correlation (xcorr), pairwise granger causality (pwgc), and

    diffusion tensor imaging (dti). Frequency bands: 1-4 Hz (delta), 4-8 Hz (theta), 8-12 Hz (alpha),

    15-20 Hz (beta1), 20-30 Hz (beta2), 30-50 Hz (gamma). Significance thresholds: p < 0.05 (*), p

    < 0.01 (**), p < 0.001 (***), p < 0.0001 (****).




                                                                                                                                     29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    References

    [1] Friston KJ. Functional and Effective Connectivity: A Review. Brain Connect 2011;1:13–36.

          https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0008.

    [2] Bowyer SM. Coherence a measure of the brain networks: past and present. Neuropsychiatr

          Electrophysiol 2016;2:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40810-015-0015-7.

    [3] Basser PJ, Pajevic S, Pierpaoli C, Duda J, Aldroubi A. In vivo fiber tractography using DT-

          MRI data. Magn Reson Med 2000;44:625–632. https://doi.org/10.1002/1522-

          2594(200010)44:4<625::AID-MRM17>3.0.CO;2-O.

    [4] Matsumoto R, Nair DR, LaPresto E, Najm I, Bingaman W, Shibasaki H, et al. Functional

          connectivity in the human language system: A cortico-cortical evoked potential study. Brain

          2004;127:2316–2330. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awh246.

    [5] Wilson CL, Isokawa M, Babb TL, Crandall PH. Functional connections in the human

          temporal lobe. I. Analysis of limbic system pathways using neuronal responses evoked by

          electrical stimulation. Exp Brain Res 1990;82:279–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00231248.

    [6] Yamao Y, Matsumoto R, Kunieda T, Arakawa Y, Kobayashi K, Usami K, et al.

          Intraoperative dorsal language network mapping by using single-pulse electrical stimulation.

          Hum Brain Mapp 2014;35:4345–4361. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22479.

    [7] Conner CR, Ellmore TM, DiSano MA, Pieters TA, Potter AW, Tandon N. Anatomic and

          electro-physiologic connectivity of the language system: A combined DTI-CCEP study.

          Comput Biol Med 2011;41:1100–1109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2011.07.008.

    [8] Matsumoto R, Nair DR, LaPresto E, Bingaman W, Shibasaki H, Lüders HO. Functional

          connectivity in human cortical motor system: A cortico-cortical evoked potential study.

          Brain 2007;130:181–197. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl257.



                                                                                                                                     30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [9] Trebaul L, Deman P, Tuyisenge V, Jedynak M, Hugues E, Rudrauf D, et al. Probabilistic

          functional tractography of the human cortex revisited. NeuroImage 2018;181:414–429.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.039.

    [10]      Kubota Y, Enatsu R, Gonzalez-Martinez J, Bulacio J, Mosher J, Burgess RC, et al. In vivo

          human hippocampal cingulate connectivity: A corticocortical evoked potentials (CCEPs)

          study. Clin Neurophysiol 2013;124:1547–1556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2013.01.024.

    [11]      Brugge JF, Volkov IO, Garell PC, Reale RA, Howard MA. Functional Connections

          between Auditory Cortex on Heschl’s Gyrus and on the Lateral Superior Temporal Gyrus in

          Humans. J Neurophysiol 2003;90:3750–3763. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00500.2003.

    [12]      Araki K, Terada K, Usui K, Usui N, Araki Y, Baba K, et al. Bidirectional neural

          connectivity between basal temporal and posterior language areas in humans. Clin

          Neurophysiol 2015;126:682–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2014.07.020.

    [13]      Enatsu R, Kubota Y, Kakisaka Y, Bulacio J, Piao Z, O’Connor T, et al. Reorganization of

          posterior language area in temporal lobe epilepsy: A cortico-cortical evoked potential study.

          Epilepsy Res 2013;103:73–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2012.07.008.

    [14]      Usami K, Matsumoto R, Kobayashi K, Hitomi T, Shimotake A, Kikuchi T, et al. Sleep

          modulates cortical connectivity and excitability in humans: Direct evidence from neural

          activity induced by single‐pulse electrical stimulation. Hum Brain Mapp 2015;36:4714–

          4729. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22948.

    [15]      Enatsu R, Piao Z, O’Connor T, Horning K, Mosher J, Burgess R, et al. Cortical

          excitability varies upon ictal onset patterns in neocortical epilepsy: A cortico-cortical evoked

          potential study. Clin Neurophysiol 2012;123:252–260.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2011.06.030.




                                                                                                                                     31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [16]      Matsumoto R, Kunieda T, Nair D. Single pulse electrical stimulation to probe functional

          and pathological connectivity in epilepsy. Seizure 2017;44:27–36.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2016.11.003.

    [17]      Entz L, Tóth E, Keller CJ, Bickel S, Groppe DM, Fabó D, et al. Evoked effective

          connectivity of the human neocortex. Hum Brain Mapp 2014;35:5736–5753.

          https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22581.

    [18]      Keller CJ, Honey CJ, Mégevand P, Entz L, Ulbert I, Mehta AD. Mapping human brain

          networks with cortico-cortical evoked potentials. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci

          2014;369:20130528–. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0528.

    [19]      Keller CJ, Honey CJ, Entz L, Bickel S, Groppe DM, Toth E, et al. Corticocortical Evoked

          Potentials Reveal Projectors and Integrators in Human Brain Networks. J Neurosci

          2014;34:9152–9163. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4289-13.2014.

    [20]      Oya H, Howard MA, Magnotta VA, Kruger A, Griffiths TD, Lemieux L, et al. Mapping

          effective connectivity in the human brain with concurrent intracranial electrical stimulation

          and BOLD-fMRI. J Neurosci Methods 2017;277:101–112.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2016.12.014.

    [21]      Keller CJ, Bickel S, Entz L, Ulbert I, Milham MP, Kelly C, et al. Intrinsic functional

          architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U

          S A 2011;108:17234. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114425108.

    [22]      Stiso J, Khambhati AN, Menara T, Kahn AE, Stein JM, Das SR, et al. White Matter

          Network Architecture Guides Direct Electrical Stimulation through Optimal State

          Transitions. Cell Rep 2019;28:2554–2566.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.08.008.




                                                                                                                                     32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [23]      Dykstra AR, Chan AM, Quinn BT, Zepeda R, Keller CJ, Cormier J, et al. Individualized

          localization and cortical surface-based registration of intracranial electrodes. Neuroimage

          2012;59:3563–3570. https://doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.046.

    [24]      Yang AI, Wang X, Doyle WK, Halgren E, Carlson C, Belcher TL, et al. Localization of

          dense intracranial electrode arrays using magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroImage

          2012;63:157–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.039.

    [25]      Kramer MA, Eden UT, Lepage KQ, Kolaczyk ED, Bianchi MT, Cash SS. Emergence of

          persistent networks in long-term intracranial eeg recordings. J Neurosci 2011;31:15757–

          15767. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2287-11.2011.

    [26]      Chu CJ, Kramer MA, Pathmanathan J, Bianchi MT, Westover MB, Wizon L, et al.

          Emergence of stable functional networks in long-term human electroencephalography. J

          Neurosci 2012;32:2703–2713. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5669-11.2012.

    [27]      Barnett L, Seth AK. The MVGC multivariate Granger causality toolbox: A new approach

          to Granger-causal inference. J Neurosci Methods 2014;223:50–68.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.10.018.

    [28]      Oostenveld R, Fries P, Maris E, Schoffelen J-M. FieldTrip: Open source software for

          advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Comput Intell

          Neurosci 2011;2011:156869. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/156869.

    [29]      Vinck M, Oostenveld R, Van Wingerden M, Battaglia F, Pennartz CMA. An improved

          index of phase-synchronization for electrophysiological data in the presence of volume-

          conduction, noise and sample-size bias. NeuroImage 2011;55:1548–1565.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.01.055.




                                                                                                                                     33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [30]      Behrens TEJ, Woolrich MW, Jenkinson M, Johansen-Berg H, Nunes RG, Clare S, et al.

          Characterization and Propagation of Uncertainty in Diffusion-Weighted MR Imaging. Magn

          Reson Med 2003;50:1077–1088. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.10609.

    [31]      Behrens TEJ, Berg HJ, Jbabdi S, Rushworth MFS, Woolrich MW. Probabilistic diffusion

          tractography with multiple fibre orientations: What can we gain? NeuroImage 2007;34:144–

          155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.018.

    [32]      Jenkinson M, Smith S. A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain

          images. Med Image Anal 2001;5:143–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-8415(01)00036-6.

    [33]      Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S. Improved Optimization for the Robust and

          Accurate Linear Registration and Motion Correction of Brain Images. NeuroImage

          2002;17:825–841. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1132.

    [34]      Greve DN, Fischl B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based

          registration. NeuroImage 2009;48:63–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.060.

    [35]      Chu CJ, Tanaka N, Diaz J, Edlow BL, Wu O, Hämäläinen M, et al. EEG functional

          connectivity is partially predicted by underlying white matter connectivity. NeuroImage

          2015;108:23–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.033.

    [36]      Crone NE, Miglioretti DL, Gordon B, Lesser RP. Functional mapping of human

          sensorimotor cortex with electrocorticographic spectral analysis II. Event-related

          synchronization in the gamma band. Brain 1998;121:2301–2315.

          https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/121.12.2301.

    [37]      Miller KJ, Leuthardt EC, Schalk G, Rao RPN, Anderson NR, Moran DW, et al. Spectral

          changes in cortical surface potentials during motor movement. J Neurosci 2007;27:2424–

          2432. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3886-06.2007.




                                                                                                                                     34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [38]      Hawasli AH, Kim DH, Ledbetter NM, Dahiya S, Barbour DL, Leuthardt EC. Influence of

          white and gray matter connections on endogenous human cortical oscillations. Front Hum

          Neurosci 2016;10:7–12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00330.

    [39]      Hebbink J, van Blooijs D, Huiskamp G, Leijten FSS, van Gils SA, Meijer HGE. A

          Comparison of Evoked and Non-evoked Functional Networks. Brain Topogr 2019;32:405–

          417. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10548-018-0692-1.

    [40]      Borchers S, Himmelbach M, Logothetis N, Karnath H. Direct electrical stimulation of

          human cortex — the gold standard for mapping brain functions? Nat Rev Neurosci

          2012;13:63–70.

    [41]      Rockland KS. About connections. Front Neuroanat 2015;9:1–7.

          https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2015.00061.

    [42]      Miocinovic S, de Hemptinne C, Chen W, Isbaine F, Willie JT, Ostrem JL, et al. Cortical

          Potentials Evoked by Subthalamic Stimulation Demonstrate a Short Latency Hyperdirect

          Pathway in Humans. J Neurosci 2018;38:9129–9141.

          https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-18.2018.

    [43]      Suzuki Y, Enatsu R, Kanno A, Yokoyama R, Suzuki H, Tachibana S, et al. The Influence

          of Anesthesia on Corticocortical Evoked Potential Monitoring Network Between Frontal and

          Temporoparietal Cortices. World Neurosurg 2019;123:e685–e692.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.11.253.

    [44]      Devergnas A, Wichmann T. Cortical Potentials Evoked by Deep Brain Stimulation in the

          Subthalamic Area. Front Syst Neurosci 2011;5:1–8.

          https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2011.00030.




                                                                                                                                     35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20212266.this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    [45]      Histed MH, Bonin V, Reid RC. Direct Activation of Sparse, Distributed Populations of

          Cortical Neurons by Electrical Microstimulation. Neuron 2009;63:508–522.

          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.016.

    [46]      Herrington TM, Cheng JJ, Eskandar EN. Mechanisms of deep brain stimulation. J

          Neurophysiol 2016;115:19–38. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.10145.

    [47]      Muller L, Hamilton LS, Edwards E, Bouchard KE, Chang EF. Spatial resolution

          dependence on spectral frequency in human speech cortex electrocorticography. J Neural

          Eng 2016;13:056013. https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/13/5/056013.Spatial.




                                                                                                                                     36
