medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Modelling the potential impact of mask use in schools and society on COVID-19 control
         in the UK
         J.Panovska-Griffiths1,2,3*, C.C. Kerr4,5, W. Waites6, R.M. Stuart7,8, D. Mistry4, D. Foster9,
         D.J. Klein4, R.M.Viner10$, C. Bonell11$,
         1
           Department of Applied Health Research, University College London, London, UK
         2
           Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK
         3
           The Queen’s College, Oxford University, Oxford, UK
         4
           Institute for Disease Modeling, Seattle, WA, USA
         5
           School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
         6
           School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
         7
           Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
         8
           Disease Elimination Program, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
         9
           Rethink Priorities, Redwood City, CA, USA
         10
            UCL Great Ormond St. Institute of Child Health, London, UK
         11
            Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
         London, UK
         $ These authors contributed equally
         *Corresponding author: j.panovska-griffiths@ucl.ac.uk
         Abstract
         Recent findings suggest that an adequate test-trace-isolate (TTI) strategy is needed to prevent
         a secondary COVID-19 wave with the reopening of society in the UK. Here we assess the
         potential importance of mandatory masks in the parts of community and in secondary
         schools. We show that, assuming current TTI levels, adoption of masks in secondary schools
         in addition to community settings can reduce the size of a second wave, but will not prevent
         it; more testing of symptomatic people, tracing and isolating of their contacts is also needed.
         To avoid a second wave, with masks mandatory in secondary schools and in certain
         community settings, under current tracing levels, 68% or 46% of those with symptomatic
         infection would need to be tested if masks’ effective coverage were 15% or 30% respectively,
         compared to 76% and 57% if masks are mandated in community settings but not secondary
         schools.
         Keywords: COVID-19, masks, test-trace-isolate strategies, mathematical modelling, agent-
         based model
                                                                                                                                       1
      NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Introduction
         Evidence to date suggests that SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes COVID-19, is
         mainly transmitted when someone who has COVID-19 coughs, sneezes or exhales and
         releases droplets of infected fluid [1]. Some of the droplets can be breathed in by people
         within a close proximity and some will fall on nearby surfaces and objects. If people touch
         the contaminated objects and then touch their eyes, nose or mouth, COVID-19 may also be
         transmitted [2-3]. Reducing the frequency of physical contact, maintaining good hygiene and
         good ventilation, and pursuing effective test-trace-isolate (TTI) strategies are important non-
         pharmaceutical interventions that can reduce COVID-19 transmission before a vaccine or
         effective anti-viral drugs become available.
         In the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was uncertainty over the effectiveness
         of face coverings in reducing the spread of COVID-19 and protecting the public [4-5]. While
         public use of face coverings was adopted early in many Asian countries that have had
         experience with epidemics such as SARS in 2003 [6], countries such as the USA and the UK
         were slower in mandating face coverings, despite relatively high levels of public support [7].
         For the purposes of this study, we will refer to face coverings or masks interchangeably to
         mean face protection that covers the mouth and nose.
         There is now considerable evidence supporting the effectiveness of masks for protecting
         against transmission between individuals. Laboratory experiments have found that almost all
         types of masks can greatly reduce droplet emission and viral shedding by infectious wearers
         [8-9] suggesting their effectiveness for source control. Two observational studies [10-11] and
         recent systematic reviews focusing on SARS-1, MERS and influenza [12-15] indicate that
         masks also substantially reduce infection risk to the non-infected wearer, even when their
         infectious contact is unmasked. Specifically, Chu et al. [12] suggest that face coverings use
         could result in a reduction in infection risk of around 44% (95% CI = 11–60%) in a
         community setting, with stronger associations in a healthcare setting and with use of N95
         respirators compared to surgical or cotton masks. No randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
         have been completed on face coverings against COVID-19 or other coronaviruses (although
         one is currently underway [16]). Observational studies are prone to confounding, and RCTs
         focused on influenza are inconclusive [13]. Epidemiological studies have also shown a
         negative association between mask prevalence and COVID-19 incidence at a city, state and
         national level [17-20].
         The use of face coverings is becoming mandatory in certain community settings across the
         four UK nations. In England, masks became mandatory on public transport on June 15, 2020,
         and in shops from July 24, 2020, with further expansion of places where masks are
         mandatory announced on July 31, 2020 [21] and new rules being enforceable by law from
         August 08, 2020. In Scotland, masks have been mandatory on public transport since June 22,
         2020 and in shops since July 10, 2020 [22]. Masks have been mandatory on public transport
         in Wales and Northern Ireland since July 10, 2020 [23].
         However, the magnitude of the effect of compulsory masking on COVID-19 incidence is still
         highly uncertain since there is no straightforward way to infer a change in transmission
         probability from a change in viral emission. Mathematical modelling, having already played
         an important role in informing policy around the COVID-19 pandemic [24-31], can help to
                                                                                                                                2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         assess the likely impact of compulsory masking. Models has been used to evaluate the impact
         of the lockdown [29-30], to explore the efficacy of different test-trace-isolate (TTI) strategies
         [26-28,31] and a growing number of modelling studies considering the impact of masks on
         the COVID-19 epidemic [32-39]. While the overall message from these models is that, as
         lockdown measures are relaxed, masks are likely to be effective if they are worn by a large
         percentage of the population, they often optimistically assumed that a large proportion of
         transmission events could be prevented with face masks by overestimating their efficacy and
         guided by evidence of the impact of masks on influenza transmission reduction [15]; hence
         their results are likely to overestimate impact. Furthermore, with the exception of a few
         studies [36-39], many studies to date have used population-based models that do not
         differentiate between household, school, workplace and community contacts. Under the
         current policy of mandatory masks wearing in the UK, only the community contacts will be
         affected and untangling different layers of contacts is crucial in evaluating the impact of
         masks. In summary, existing modelling studies are likely to exaggerate the impact of face
         coverings.
         Our recent work [28], which used the detailed individual-based model called Covasim [36],
         highlighted that adequate TTI is needed to prevent a secondary epidemic wave when broader
         society including schools reopen in the UK. Here, we extend this work by calibrating
         Covasim, illustrated in Figures 1A-B, to recent data, to August 28, 2020 rather than June 17,
         2020 as in [28], taking in consideration the slower-than-anticipated reopening of society in
         the UK during July and August, and to explore whether extending mandatory mask use to
         secondary school students alongside its existing use in some community settings could
         contribute to reducing the risk of COVID-19 wave resurgence later this year. The most recent
         findings from the CoMIX studies suggest that the contact rate in England is increasing much
         slower than anticipated with an average of 4 contacts per person during July and August
         compared to around 11 contacts per day in pre-COVID-19 era [30]. We anticipate that this
         will increase with reopening of schools but less than the anticipated 90% of the pre-COVID-
         19 contact rate previously modelled in [28].
         WHO recommends mask use for children over 12 years under the same conditions as adults,
         with decisions on mandatory use for those between 6-11 based on a set of conditions [40].
         This recommendation is on the basis that younger children may have lower susceptibility and
         potentially lower transmissibility than adults [41]. While the evidence is not conclusive, we
         anticipate the practicalities with younger children correctly obeying masks rules are more
         challenging than for older children. In addition, face masks are more likely to hamper the
         education of primary than secondary school children given the focus on learning basic
         speaking and social skills. Children over 12 years old in the context of the UK school systems
         attend secondary schools and recently, following WHO guidance [42], the government has
         permitted schools to mandate mask wearing in communal areas (where high levels of social
         mixing and lower levels of social distancing may occur) [43]. Overall data on mask use in
         children is sparse, with a recent WHO document [40] suggesting that mask fit and
         compliance is likely to be poorer in children than in adults and hence mask efficacy levels
         based upon adult data may need to be adjusted. To account for this uncertainty in the
         compliance with mask-wearing and their efficacy, we simulate two levels of masks’ effective
         coverage in schools and community settings (estimated as the product of the masks efficacy
         (per-contact risk reduction) and coverage (the proportion of contacts in which they are worn);
         see Methods). We aim to estimate the different combinations of testing and tracing levels
         necessary to avoid COVID-19 resurgence after September 2020 and a second COVID-19
         wave later this or next year, accounting for community mask-wearing and scenarios with and
                                                                                                                                3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         without mandatory masks in secondary schools, including two levels of masks’ effective
         coverage. The strategies we have explored have been discussed with members of scientific
         advisory bodies in the UK.
         Results
         As part of calibrating the model, we estimated the daily probabilities of testing people with
         symptoms between January 21, 2020 and August 28, 2020. These were 2.77% for both July
         and August, corresponding to around 24% of people with symptomatic infection tested
         during their illness (assuming an average symptomatic period of around 10 days). We note
         that this is higher than the 18% testing level when we calibrated until June 17, 2020 in [28].
         Furthermore, in calibrating to the UK epidemic, we estimated that 1,500 people were
         infected in the UK on January 21, 2020, that the per-contact transmission probability was
         0.72% under the assumption that 70% of infections were symptomatic, and that 0.75% of
         those with asymptomatic COVID-19 infections were tested at some point during their illness
         (see Methods for details). Figure 1C shows the results of the model calibration.
         The projections from the calibrated model across all scenarios are shown in Figures 2-4. In
         Figure 2 we show the heatmaps of the peak of the cumulative infections for different trace (x-
         axis) and test (y-axis) levels. Increases in cumulative infections result from resurgences of
         COVID-19; comparable increases can be seen in new infections and deaths (Figures S1-S2).
         In Figure 2, higher cumulative infections are shown in darker shades of red, while lower
         values are lighter colours. Across these figures (and respectively Figures S1-S2 of the
         supplementary material), a very light orange colour represents a region within the heatmaps
         where the resurgence of COVID-19 is controlled with combinations of adequate test-trace
         and mask wear.
         In Figures 3-4, across the four scenarios, we show illustrative temporal profiles for the new
         infections for two different combinations of test-trace levels: the current 24% testing and
         47% tracing level with predicted second wave and a test-trace combination where the
         resurgence of COVID-19 is avoided.
         Masks worn in some community settings but not in secondary schools
         Reopening of broad areas of society in the UK together with schools from September 01,
         2020, with masks mandatory in parts of community from July 24, 2020 but not in schools,
         will result in an increase in COVID-19 cases if test-trace levels are insufficient under both
         assumptions about masks’ effective coverage (dark red region in Figures 2A and 2C). Under
         the current testing level (24% of symptomatic people tested at some point of their infection)
         and with 47% of contacts traceable, we predict an increase in the number of new COVID-19
         infections from September 2020, which in these scenarios peak around March 2021, under
         both assumptions of masks’ effective coverage (Figure 3A and 3C). The strength of the
         secondary COVID-19 wave is predicted to vary depending on the effective coverage of
         masks (Figure 3A and 3C), but could be up to the same level as the original COVID-19 wave
         in the UK.
         With adequate combinations of test-trace levels, a second epidemic wave may be avoided
         (Figure 2A and 2C, light orange-coloured region). For example, to achieve this, assuming
         47% of contacts could be traced, as was the case in July and August 2020, with low mask
         effective coverage (15%) in relevant community settings, 76% of those with symptomatic
                                                                                                                                4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         infection would need to be diagnosed and isolated (Figure 4A). If masks’ effective coverage
         in community settings were higher (30%), the necessary testing level would be 57% (Figure
         4C).
         Masks worn in secondary schools alongside some community settings
         With reopening of broad areas of society in the UK together with schools from September 01,
         2020, with masks mandatory in parts of community from July 24, 2020 but also in secondary
         schools, our model predicts a secondary COVID-19 wave will again occur unless there is an
         adequate test-trace program. This is the case under both assumptions of masks’ effective
         coverage (dark red region in Figures 2B and 2D). For the scenario of low (15%) effective
         coverage of masks, under current testing (24%) and tracing levels (47%), the model predicts
         that a resurgence in COVID-19 cases is likely to start from September 2020 and peak around
         March 2021 (Figure 3B). However, with higher (30%) effective coverage of masks, and if
         they are mandatory in secondary schools, the strength of the second epidemic wave is
         predicted to be much less. This is evident from comparing the size of the light orange region
         in Figures 2B and 2D and also when comparing Figures 3B and 3D for current test-trace
         levels.
         With a scaled-up version of the current TTI strategy, the resurgence in COVID-19 can be
         avoided (Figures 4B and 4D). To achieve this, assuming current tracing levels (47% of
         contacts traced and isolated) continue in future, testing levels of 68% or 46% of those with
         symptomatic infection during their infectiousness period are necessary if masks’ effective
         coverage is respectively 15% or 30%.
         Masks in secondary schools vs masks not in secondary schools
         Our results suggest that there is a greater benefit of mandatory masks in secondary schools if
         the effective coverage of masks is high (30%) (Figure 3A vs 3B and 3C vs 3D). Under
         current testing and tracing levels (24% testing, 47% tracing) and masks’ effective coverage of
         30%, the predicted second COVID-19 wave would be less than half of the original wave if
         masks were mandatory in secondary schools as well as used in community settings
         (comparing Figures 3C and 3D). If the effective coverage of masks is less (15%), the effect
         of the mask wearing in schools on the predicted wave is much less (comparing Figures 3A
         and 3B). The minimum testing levels necessary to avoid a second wave, under scaled up TTI,
         is 8-11% less when masks are mandatory in schools than if they are not, depending on the
         effective coverage of masks (76% and 57% in Figures 3A and 3C compared to 68% and 46%
         in Figures 3B and 3D respectively).
         Discussion
         Summary of findings
         Our results suggest that, with broader society including schools reopened from September
         2020, and with current levels of coverage of TTI, mandating the use of masks in secondary
         schools would result in fewer infections, but would not be sufficient to prevent a secondary
         COVID-19 wave in the UK later this year. Only with increased TTI coverage could a
         secondary COVID-19 wave be avoided. The necessary TTI coverage requires testing
         sufficient number of symptomatic people and then sufficient identification, tracing and
         isolation of their positive contacts. Across different assumptions of masks’ effective
                                                                                                                                5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         coverage, different levels of testing and tracing would be necessary to avoid a second
         epidemic wave. For example, if masks were mandatory in secondary schools, assuming that
         current tracing levels of 47% continue, 68% or 46% of those with symptomatic infection
         would need to be tested respectively under scenarios of 15% and 30% mask effective
         coverage. If masks were not mandatory at secondary schools, the respective numbers would
         be 76% and 57% for 15% and 30% effective coverage of masks in the relevant community
         settings.
         Novelty of our work, policy relevance and putting in context of current literature
         Overall, our findings suggest that making masks mandatory in secondary schools would be of
         some benefit, but that scaling up of TTI coverage is necessary to prevent resurgence of
         COVID-19 later this year and beyond while we await an effective vaccine. We highlight that
         adoption of masks in schools, in addition to using in community settings, can help reduce a
         potential secondary epidemic wave, but, to do this effectively, the effective coverage of
         masks has to be assumed to be high (30% in our case). If it were lower, the reduction in the
         potential second wave would be smaller. Uncertainties concerning the effectiveness of the
         masks remain, and results add to the ongoing body of evidence on the impact of using face
         masks against the epidemic spread.
         Unlike previous work that has considered specific values of testing level and projecting
         outcomes, our modelling provides all combinations of thresholds for testing and tracing
         coverage that could prevent a COVID-19 resurgence and a secondary wave whether or not
         mask were mandatory in secondary schools. Furthermore, previous studies [32-39] have
         explored the broader impact of masks by simulating lowered transmission across all layers in
         society. The Covasim model instead has the granularity to consider specific layers, hence
         allowing our study to specifically explore the impact of mandatory masks in secondary
         schools, in combination with different levels of TTI coverage.
         Limitations of our work
         The analyses presented here have several limitations. First, while we have made an effort to
         model the UK epidemic, some of the parameters we have used are from other settings.
         Secondly, as with any modelling study, we have made a series of assumptions within the
         modelling framework, for example concerning the proportion of infections which are
         symptomatic, and the susceptibility and infectiousness of children compared to adults. Large
         uncertainty regarding the proportion of asymptomatic infection remains with recent evidence
         [51] suggesting that asymptomatic incidence has a wide range of 2-57%. In our model, we
         have assumed that symptomatic infections account for 70% of onward-transmitted infections,
         as a number of other models have assumed [26-29] and that development of symptoms is
         age-dependent analogous to other studies [26-29].
         The model considers mask wearing to be uniform in the sense that, for a given level of
         coverage in a subpopulation (say a school), the average transmission probability is reduced
         by the same amount. In reality, there are four possible cases for an interaction between a
         susceptible and an infectious individual: both are wearing a mask, neither are wearing a
         mask, or one or the other is wearing a mask. The transmission probability will be different for
         each of these four cases. Because the way in which transmission probability can be expected
         to vary is not well-understood, we use ‘effective coverage’ as a catch-all for the four different
                                                                                                                                6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         cases. More research is required to understand the extent to which these fine-grained details
         matter.
         We also note that we have set the level of contact tracing to be the same across all contact
         network layers. We are aware that this may lead to oversimplification and that some contact
         network layers may be more likely to be traced than others. For example, the reports from
         NHS Test and Trace [50] summarised in Table 1 until end of August, report % contacts
         reached by complex (e.g. schools and workplaces) and non-complex cases (e.g. households)
         suggesting that complex cases have better tracing as they are usually in institutions where
         contacts identities are better known. The percentage of contacts reached within the
         community are not reported and we expect that challenges associated with finding, tracing
         and isolating are with contacts in the community, and that this may reduce the overall impact
         of the programme. With this in mind, within the model we have assumed an average contact
         tracing level across all layers.
         Our simulations over the period from September 2020 until December 2021 reflect a great
         deal of uncertainty, as can be seen from the shaded bands in Figures 3-4. Each of our model
         simulations represents one possible realisation of the flow of COVID-19 transmission among
         the population, but since this depends on the exact characteristics of who gets infected and
         when, the dynamics of transmission over long periods are subject to substantial uncertainties.
         While we have captured some of this uncertainty in our epidemic projections, we have not
         captured the impact of this on our estimates of the testing levels required to avoid a
         secondary epidemic wave, nor on our estimates of the population-level efficacy of masks. We
         have provided point estimates of the testing levels that would be necessary to avoid a
         secondary wave, but these should be interpreted with a degree of caution since they are based
         on the median simulation from a stochastic process with a degree of variation.
         Finally, we note that we do not account for interactions between regions that differ in policy
         and infrastructure; for example the differences between Scotland’s ‘Test and Protect’ strategy
         and the NHS England ‘Test and Trace’ strategy. Rules on distancing and mask wearing have
         also been varied in different regions where prevalence is higher. We do not, however, attempt
         to model the effect of individuals moving between regions mediating the interaction of these
         different epidemics unfolding in different ways under different conditions. These aspects can
         be considered in future extension of this work.
         Under the current policy on masks in UK, masks are not mandatory in all workplaces and
         hence we have not included these in our modelling framework. Furthermore, there are some
         variations in policy recommendations across the four UK nations with workers in some
         workplaces required to wear masks; for example workplaces that are open to the public
         requiring the workers to wear masks in Scotland but not in England [22]. Since our intention
         was to model the UK epidemic as a whole, we do not differentiate between these differences.
         Instead, we have assumed that up to 50% of the workforce will return to work, with the rest
         of the people remaining working from home, based on slight increases to the current
         estimates on the proportion of the workforce returning to work during July and August [49].
         If policy changes and masks are made mandatory in workplaces, we could explore this
         scenario in future.
                                                                                                                                7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Similarly, we have modelled that in schools masks would be worn by secondary school
         children only since this is the policy recommendation informed by evidence that younger
         children have lower susceptibility and potentially lower transmissibility than adults [41]. In
         addition, we note that many of the school-based outbreaks observed globally have been
         concentrated in older students [44]. In the process of developing our models and preparing
         this manuscript, we have explored additional scenarios with masks mandatory in all schools,
         only primary schools etc, but the results of these other models are not included here as these
         are not under consideration for UK policy on masks. Within the modelling framework, we
         can evaluate a large number of scenarios considering different permutations of mask usage by
         different cohorts and across various settings. But the purpose of this study was to evaluate a
         feasible and policy-relevant subset of these permutations.
         While our results report the COVID-19 cases/deaths projections over a relative long
         timescale, until the end of December 2021, we are aware that long-time forecasting with
         epidemiological modelling has a level of uncertainty. For example, future epidemic
         trajectories heavily depend on both human behaviour, future policy choices and future
         clinical therapies, which, as these are currently unknown, are not accounted for in the
         model. Specifically, this analysis does not assess future changes that may occur such as
         potential seasonality of the virus, reactive policies of, for example, intermittent local
         lockdowns or trade-offs in reopening society, or implementation of therapies to reduce
         severity of symptoms of COVID-19 related mortality or vaccination policies, thus making the
         model projections over the longtime period uncertain. But, since the scope of this analysis
         was to illustrate whether a resurgence of COVID-19 will occur later this or next year in a
         shape of a second epidemic wave, running the simulations until the end of 2021 was a
         necessity to illustrate this point and suggest when the potential peak may occur subject to the
         epidemic continuing on the current trajectory and under current conditions.
         We also note that school-based reopening are expected to be accompanied by numerous
         countermeasures relating to physical distancing, hygiene, ventilation and ‘bubbles ’of year
         group in secondary schools and classes in primary schools as well as masks. With these
         countermeasures in place, it is expected that school-based transmission risk to students,
         teachers and staff may be somewhat mitigated, but the adherence to these policies by school
         children at all times is uncertain. Hence on balance, for this analysis, we have assumed that
         such measures could reduce transmission by 10%. We note that this is a modelling
         assumption and it may be an underestimation.
         Furthermore, while our findings suggest that adequate TTI is required alongside masks
         wearing in secondary schools and in community settings to prevent COVID-19 resurgence,
         the increased numbers of contacts due to school mixing, and reduced adherence to school-
         based rules on social distancing, can easily overwhelm the TTI programs. The questions
         remain whether the UK has sufficient testing capacity to a) scale-up to levels suggested by
         our study and b) trace increasing numbers of contacts per index in schools, workplaces and
         community settings. We acknowledge that achieving this will be challenging, and especially
         so if the UK is faced with a second wave with possible test delays, test capacity being
         reached and the contact tracing system being overwhelmed. In addition, effective isolation is
         also important and the currently reported levels of isolation need to be improved [45-46]. All
         of these factors could further reduce the impact of the TTI programme.
                                                                                                                                8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Implications for policy
         Overall our findings suggest that mandating masks in parts of society and in secondary
         schools could be beneficial as it can reduce the strength of COVID-19 resurgence across the
         society. Wearing masks forms a barrier for the viral particles to pass from the wearer to
         people surrounding them and vice versa [42], and hence wearing them at schools could
         reduce COVID-19 incidence in students, staff and teachers. In future work, we plan to
         evaluate the trade-offs within UK society necessary to keep schools open as COVID-19 cases
         start to increase and project the contribution to the society COVID-19 transmission from
         different contact network layers and age groups.
         Conclusions
         In summary, our modelling suggests that while adoption of masks in secondary schools in
         addition to community settings may contribute to reducing the size of a second wave, it is not
         sufficient to prevent a secondary COVID-19 wave in the UK. Instead, a masks policy would
         need to be combined with adequate TTI strategy that can test a large proportion of
         symptomatic people during their infectious period, effectively trace their contacts and isolate
         them.
         Methods
         Transmission model
         Analogous to our recently published work [28], we modelled the spread of COVID-19 using
         Covasim, a stochastic individual-based model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission across a
         population. Development and implementation details can be found at http://docs.covasim.org
         with the methodology outlined in [36]. The model was previously applied to explore different
         scenarios of schools reopening in the UK [28], explore the epidemic spread in Australia [37]
         and explore different non-pharmaceutical interventions for epidemic control in Seattle, USA
         [36]. The code used to run all simulations contained in this paper is available from
         https://github.com/Jasminapg/Covid-19-Analysis.
         For the purposes of the analyses presented in this paper, we used Covasim’s default
         parameters, pre-populated demographic data on population age structures and household
         sizes by country, and with four population contact network layers for schools, workplaces,
         households and community settings. The per-contact transmission probability (the risk of
         SARS-CoV-2 transmission during a contact between an infectious individual and a
         susceptible individual) is assumed to depend on the contact network. Covasim accounts for
         testing strategies via parameters that determine the probabilities with which people with
         different symptoms receive a test each day.
         Data sources and calibration
         We used Covasim’s defaults to generate a population of 100,000 agents who interact over the
         four contact networks layers described above. To fit the model to the UK epidemic, we
         performed an automated search for the optimal values of the number of infected people on 21
         January 2020, the per-contact transmission probability, and the daily testing probabilities for
                                                                                                                                9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         symptomatic individuals (‫ ) ݏ݌‬during May, June, July and August. The optimal values were
         the ones that minimised the sum of squared differences between the model’s estimates of
         confirmed cases and deaths, and data on these same two indicators between January 21, 2020
         and August 28, 2020 collated from the UK government’s COVID-19 dashboard
         (https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk). These particular parameters were selected as the most
         important to estimate because of the considerable uncertainties around them. We accounted
         for effect of the lockdown by reducing the per-contact transmission probabilities from 23
         March 2020, up to 2% of their pre-lockdown values within schools, and to 20% of their pre-
         lockdown values within workplace and community settings, and increased these in a phased
         way since the phased relaxing of the lockdown measures from 1st June. Exact scaling is
         shown in Table 2.
         We also used publicly available weekly data from NHS Test and Trace to generate a level of
         contact tracing of contacts of those testing positive since the start of the programme on May
         28, 2020 and collated in Table 1. We multiplied the percentage of people testing positive that
         were interviewed, the percentage of those reporting contacts and the percentage of contacts
         that were traced to generate an overall percentage for contacts of those tested positive that
         were traced. This assumed that all those testing positive would have the same number of
         contacts regardless of whether or not these were reported. We determined that this contact
         tracing level was 42% for June, 47% for July and 44% August, with an average of 47%
         tracing since 28th May 2020. We assumed that 0.75% with asymptomatic COVID-19
         infections being tested at some point during their illness (assuming an average symptomatic
         period of roughly 10 days) throughout June-August.
         Modelled effective coverage of different contact network layers
         In this study we used effective coverage as a measure for effectiveness across all types of
         face coverings, and we translated this into the modelling framework by reducing the
         transmission probability of different population layers.
         For the policy, we assumed that either masks will be mandatory in parts of community, such
         as public transport from June 15, 2020, and then extended to more places, such as shops,
         from July 24, 2020, but not in schools from 1st September, or that masks will be mandatory in
         parts of community from June 15, 2020, and then in more places from July 24 and also in the
         communal areas of secondary schools outside of the classroom from 1st September. For each
         scenario, we derived effective coverage of face coverings as a product of efficacy and
         coverage (proportion of contacts in which at least one mask is used) across layers. We
         modelled these policies by scaling down the probability of transmission by this effective
         coverage level in the relevant layers depending on the two policies of face coverings with
         details in Table 2. We used two values of effective coverage to describe a lower and higher
         effective coverage of face coverings across settings and below we describe how we arrived at
         these two values.
         Efficacy of masks
         The efficacy of masks was defined as the size of the reduction in transmission probability
         during a contact between a susceptible and exposed individual when a mask is worn by one
         or both parties. For protecting the healthy wearer, systematic reviews and meta-analyses in
         other viruses have found mean effect sizes of around 45% in community settings [12] with a
         range of approximately 20–80% [12-14]. These should be adjusted downwards to account
                                                                                                                              10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         for different mask types, since cloth masks, the kind most commonly used among the UK
         public [7] are less effective than the N95 ventilators used by some study participants [12].
         The reviewed studies, mostly case-control, were also subject to potential biases that may have
         inflated the effect size; for example, people who wear masks may tend to be more careful, for
         example in terms of washing hands more often and in keeping greater distance from cases,
         than those who do not. However, we must also factor in source control. Experiments have
         shown face coverings, especially but not exclusively medical masks, to greatly reduce viral
         shedding and droplet dispersal [8-9]. Taking all of these in consideration, we modelled a
         mean of 45% with a range of 25–70% as a reasonable estimate of face covering efficacy. This
         is calculated as the weighted average of one-person masking and both-people masking.
         Coverage of masks across different contact network layers
         School contact network layer
         Within the model, we had to make assumptions on who may be wearing masks at schools.
         The education system in the UK consists of 14 school years (age 4-18 years) each of which
         start in September and finish the following July. There are seven years of primary school,
         with children entering reception aged 4 and leaving aged 11, followed by seven years of
         secondary school. Following discussion among the authors and with scientific advisors and
         policy decision makers in the UK, we decided to model the use of masks by secondary school
         students only, i.e. the last seven years of education. This implies that the coverage of masks
         in the school layer is at most 50%. The current masks policy is that masks are recommended
         in corridors and other communal “hot spots’ areas where there is a higher risk of COVID-19
         transmission [47]. But this is implemented differently across different schools, and for
         simplicity we have assumed that the coverage of face coverings in the school layer is at most
         50%. We note that this would be reduced if that that masks are not worn in classrooms and if
         students’ use of masks is not perfect. As before, the efficacy of face coverings was estimated
         to be 25–70%, and to account for uncertainty, we modelled two efficacy values of 30% and
         60%. Multiplying by a coverage level of 50% we derived an effective coverage of 15% and
         30% describing lower and higher effective coverage of masks in schools.
         Community contact network layer
         In our previous work [28] we assumed that with schools reopening, the society will reopen
         proportionally to school years going back. This would imply that with schools fully going
         back, the society would reopen to 90% of its pre-COVID-19 level. However, recent reports
         from surveys tracking the increase in contact rates suggest that during July and August the
         contact rate has only marginally increased to at most 4 contacts per person which is 36% of
         the pre-COVID-19 level. This is anticipated to increase with schools reopening but we
         anticipate not to 90% as modelled before, but likely to around 70% of the pre-COVID-19
         level.
         In terms of mask usage, in the UK, self-reported surveys for August 31- Sep 06 suggests that
         64% of Britons “always” and 15% of Britons “frequently wear mask while in public places
         [48]. Since we do not model specific parts of the community, e.g. transport network or shops,
         separately, we use a slightly larger than the mean coverage level reported in the surveys [48]
         and assume that overall adherence to masks in community is around 50%. As before, the
         efficacy of face coverings was estimated to be 25–70%, and to account for uncertainty, we
                                                                                                                              11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         modelled two efficacy values of 30% and 60% producing effective coverage levels of 15%
         and 30%.
         Workplace contact network layer
         Face coverings are not currently mandatory in workplaces across UK. In our previous work
         [28], we assumed that with schools reopening, 70% of workplaces will also reopen to al staff.
         A recent report from the Office for National Statistics suggests that 49% of workers are
         working from home [49]. We anticipate the proportion of people going back to work to
         increase when schools reopen. We thus assume across scenarios that 60% of the workforce
         will return with reopening of schools during school term-time, 10% of which will
         additionally work from home during the school holidays. We also assume that making the
         workplaces COVID-19 secure will also reduce transmission in the workplace, and hence
         model the transmission probability for the workplace layer to be 50% of the pre-COVID-19
         level during term time and 40% during school holidays.
         Scenarios
         While it is possible in our framework to explore the effect of varying assumptions regarding
         mask type, effectiveness, compliance, geographical location, setting (school, workplace,
         community) and other factors that may affect the impact of mask policies, this would require
         sampling an infeasible number of scenarios, and be of limited value given the standard of
         evidence available. Instead, under the scenarios of reopening of schools from September
         2020, alongside society, and under different levels of TTI strategies, we simulated four
         scenarios describing two policies on face coverings and two levels of face coverings effective
         coverage. The four scenarios are modelled by reduction in the transmission probability across
         layers as described in Table 2.
         Analysis
         For each of the four scenarios, we estimated the daily and cumulative numbers of infections
         and deaths, until 31 December 2021 for all possible combinations of test and trace levels.
         Since Covasim is stochastic, we simulated each scenario under 12 different random number
         seeds, and we present the median estimates along with ranges corresponding to the upper and
         lower bounds generated by these 12 seeds.
         Across each scenario, we illustrated our results for two test-trace combinations using the
         current tracing level and two testing levels: current and scaled-up to avoid a second wave.
         Tables
           Weeks                    % of people tested       % of people tested    % of close contacts reached
                                    positive that are        positive that         within 1-2 days
                                    reached within 1-2       provided 1 or more
                                    days                     close contacts
           28th May – 24th          73.9                     67.6                  86.4                            [50]
           June
                                                                                                                              12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
           25th June -1stJuly       77.4                     75.8                   70.8                           [50]
           2nd July – 8th July      78.7                     78.2                   71.1                           [50]
           9th July – 15th July     79.7                     79.9                   77.9                           [50]
           16th July – 22nd         81.4                     81.3                   75.1                           [50]
           July
           23rd July -29thJuly      79.4                     79.7                   72.4                           [50]
           30th July – 5th          79.7                     78.6                   71.4                           [50]
           August
           6th August -12th         78.8                     77.6                   71.3                           [50]
           August
           13th August – 19th       72.6                     75.9                   75.5                           [50]
           August
           20th August-26 th        81.4                     80.2                   69.4                           [50]
           August
         Table 1: Levels of contact tracing during June 2020, July 2020 and August 2020 collated
         from weekly report from NHS Test and Trace available from [50].
                                                                 Masks’ effective coverage scenarios
             Scenarios     Assumptions                          Household    School contacts       Work contacts      Community
                                                                contacts                                              contacts
                                                                                                                              13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
 Masks in community        - 50% coverage of face               100%         2%st
                                                                                 23
                                                                                     rd
                                                                                         March-      20%
                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                               rd
                                                                                                                  March-    20%
                                                                                                                              st
                                                                                                                                  23
                                                                                                                                       rd
                                                                                                                                          March-
     not in secondary
                                                                             21%                     40%                    40%
                           coverings in community                            31   May                31   May               31   May
                                                                                     st           th        st           th         st            th
     schools with low                                                              1     June-14          1     June-14           1     June-14
           compliance
                                                                             36%                     50%                    50%
                           - 30% efficacy of face coverings                  June                    June                   June
                                                                                        th                     th                      th
                                                                                   15      June -         15      June -          15      June -
                                                                               th                      th                     rd
                           - masks not in secondary                          24   July               24   July              23   July
                           schools                                           90%   from 1
                                                                                             st
                                                                                                     50%  from 1
                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                            43%   24
                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                           July -1
                                                                                                                                                   st
                                                                             September and           September and          September
                           - masks not in workplaces                         during term-time        during term-time       60%   from 1
                                                                                                                                             st
                                                                             2%  during school       40%  during            September and
                                                                             holidays                school holidays        during term-time
                                                                                                                            51%   during school
                                                                                                                            holidays
 Masks in community        - 50% coverage of face               100%         2%st
                                                                                 23
                                                                                     rd
                                                                                         March-      20%
                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                               rd
                                                                                                                  March-    20%
                                                                                                                              st
                                                                                                                                  23
                                                                                                                                       rd
                                                                                                                                          March-
     not in secondary
                                                                             21%                     40%                    40%
                           coverings in community                            31   May                31   May               31   May
                                                                                     st           th        st           th         st            th
    schools with high                                                              1     June-14          1     June-14           1     June-14
           compliance      - 60% efficacy of face coverings                  June                    June                   June
                                                                             36%
                                                                               th
                                                                                   15
                                                                                        th
                                                                                           June -    50%
                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                               th
                                                                                                                  June -    50%
                                                                                                                              rd
                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                          June –
                           - masks not in secondary                          24   July               24   July              23   July
                           schools                                           90%   from 1
                                                                                             st
                                                                                                     50%  from 1
                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                            35%   24
                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                           July -1
                                                                                                                                                   st
                                                                             September and           September and          September
                           - masks not in workplaces                         during term-time        during term-time       49%   from 1
                                                                                                                                             st
                                                                             2%  during school       40%  during            September and
                                                                             holidays                school holidays        during term-time
                                                                                                                            42%   during school
                                                                                                                            holidays
 Masks in community        - 50% coverage of face               100%         2%st
                                                                                 23
                                                                                     rd
                                                                                         March-      20%
                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                               rd
                                                                                                                  March-    20%
                                                                                                                              st
                                                                                                                                  23
                                                                                                                                       rd
                                                                                                                                          March-
     and in secondary      coverings in community                            31   May                31   May               31   May
     schools with low                                                        21%   1
                                                                                     st
                                                                                         June-14
                                                                                                  th
                                                                                                     40%  1
                                                                                                            st
                                                                                                                June-14
                                                                                                                         th
                                                                                                                            40%   1
                                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                                        June-14
                                                                                                                                                  th
           compliance      - 30% efficacy of face coverings                  June                    June                   June
                                                                             36%
                                                                               th
                                                                                   15
                                                                                        th
                                                                                           June -    50%
                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                               th
                                                                                                                  June -    50%
                                                                                                                              rd
                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                          June -
                           - 50% coverage of face                            24   July               24   July              23   July
                           coverings in schools (only                        77%   from 1
                                                                                             st
                                                                                                     50%  from 1
                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                            43%   24
                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                           July -1
                                                                                                                                                   st
                           secondary schools)                                September and           September and          September
                                                                             during term-time        during term-time       60%   from 1
                                                                                                                                             st
                           - masks not in workplaces                         2%  during school       40%  during            September and
                                                                                                                            51%
                                                                             holidays                school holidays        during term-time
                                                                                                                                  during school
                                                                                                                            holidays
                                                                                                                                      14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
 Masks in community        - 50% coverage of face               100%         2% 23rd March-        20% 23rd March-        20% 23rd Marc ch-
     and in secondary      coverings in community                            31
                                                                               st
                                                                                  May              31 May 40% 1
                                                                                                     st               st
                                                                                                                          31
                                                                                                                            st
                                                                                                                               May
    schools with high                                                        21% 1st June-14th     June-14
                                                                                                            th
                                                                                                                June      40% 1st June-114 th
           compliance      - 60% efficacy of face coverings                  June                  50% 15  th
                                                                                                               June -     June
                                                                             36% 15th June -       24
                                                                                                     th
                                                                                                        July              50% 15th Junee-
                           - 50% coverage of face                            24
                                                                               th
                                                                                  July             50% from 1     st
                                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                                            rd
                                                                                                                               July
                           coverings in schools (only                        63% from 1 st
                                                                                                   September and          35% 24th  July -1 st
                           secondary schools)                                September and         during term-time       September
                                                                             during term-time      40% during             49% from 1st
                           - masks not in workplaces                         2% during school      school holidays        September an nd
                                                                             holidays                                     during term-t ime
                                                                                                                          42% during scchool
                                                                                                                          holidays
         Table 2: Scale factors applied to daily SARS-CoV-2 transmission probabilities in households,
         schools, workplaces, and the community under the scenarios of face coverings policy and
         compliance levels.
         Figures
         Figure 1: A: Schematic of the model component showing the modelled effect from using face
         coverings. B: Illustration of the different levels modelled in Covasim C: Results of the model
         calibration showing the matching of the model projected cumulative COVID-19 cases and
         cumulative            deaths        associated         with     COVID-19           with         the         data      from
         https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk. Data is shown in thick blue/black lines, medians across
         twelve simulations are indicated by thin blue/blue lines and 10% and 90% quantiles by
         blue/grey shading.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Figure 2: Heatmaps of cumulative infections for different trace (x-axis) and test (y-axis)
         levels across the scenario of masks wear in parts of community with and without schools
         masks’ wear. Higher cumulative infections are shown in darker shades of red, while lower
         values are lighter colours with a light orange colour representing a region within where the
         resurgence of COVID-19 is controlled with combinations of adequate test-trace and mask
         usage.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Figure 3: Model scenarios of potential second COVID-19 epidemic wave in the UK during
         2020-2021 under different policies of masks’ wear and their effective coverage for testing
         level of 24% and tracing level of 47%. Medians across twelve simulations are indicated by
         solid red lines and 10% and 90% quantiles by red shading. The results do not change if we
         run a larger number of simulations and we tested 10, 12, 20 and 30 simulations. The
         difference is that the noise in the simulations increases with increased sample of simulations
         and this is why we chose twelve simulations for the figures here.
         Figure 4: Model scenarios of potential second COVID-19 epidemic wave in the UK during
         2020-2021 under different policies of masks’ wear and their effective coverage for testing
         and tracing levels where future the resurgence of COVID-19 is prevented. Medians across
         twelve simulations are indicated by solid red lines and 10% and 90% quantiles by red
         shading. The results do not change if we run a larger number of simulations and we tested 10,
         12, 20 and 30 simulations. The difference is that the noise in the simulations increases with
         increased sample of simulations and this is why we chose twelve simulations for the figures
         here.
         References
              1. Getting your workplace ready for COVID-19. World Health Organization report. Accessed
                   15/09/2020. https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/getting-workplace-ready-
                   for-covid-19.pdf?ua=1
              2. Aboubakr HA, Sharafeldin TA, Goyal SM. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses
                   in the environment and on common touch surfaces and the influence of climatic conditions: A
                   review [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 30]. Transbound Emerg Dis.
                   2020;10.1111/tbed.13707. doi:10.1111/tbed.13707
              3. Morawska L, Milton DK, It is Time to Address Airborne Transmission of COVID-
                   19, Clinical Infectious Diseases. ciaa939, doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa939.
              4. Greenhalgh T, Schmid MB, Czypionka T, Bassler D, Gruer L. Face masks for the public
                   during the covid-19 crisis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                   BMJ 2020; 369: 1435. doi: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1435
              5.   Graham P. Martin , Esmée Hanna , Margaret McCartney & Robert Dingwall (2020): Science,
                   society, and policy in the face of uncertainty: reflections on the debate around face coverings
                   for        the        public      during       COVID-19,       Critical        Public    Health,       DOI:
                   10.1080/09581596.2020.1797997
              6.   Sunny H Wong, Jeremy Y C Teoh, Chi-Ho Leung, William KK Wu, Benjamin H.K. Yip,
                   Martin CS Wong, David SC Hui. COVID-19 and Public Interest in Face Mask Use. American
                   Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 2020; DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202004-
                   1188LE
              7.   A Detailed Timeline of Public Opinion on the UK’s Mask Policy, accessed 15/09/2020.
                   https://redfieldandwiltonstrategies.com/a-detailed-timeline-of-public-opinion-on-the-uks-
                   mask-policy
              8.    Fischer EP, Fischer MC, Grass D, Henrion I, Warren WS, Westmas E. Low-cost
                   measurement of face mask efficacy for filtering expelled droplets during speech. Science
                   Advances 02 Sep 2020: Vol. 6, no. 36, eabd3083. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd3083
              9.   Leung NHL, Chu DKW, Shiu EYC, Chan KH, McDevitt JJ, Hau BJP, et al. Respiratory virus
                   shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks. Nat Med. 2020;26: 676–680.
                   pmid:32371934
              10.  Doung-ngern P, Suphanchaimat R, et al. Association between mask-wearing, handwashing,
                   and social distancing practices and risk of COVID-19 infections in public: a case-control
                   study in Thailand. medRxiv preprint server.
                   doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.11.20128900
              11.  Wang Y, Tian H, Zhang L, et al. Reduction of secondary transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
                   households by face mask use, disinfection and social distancing: a cohort study in Beijing,
                   China. BMJ Global Health 2020;5:e002794.
              12.   Chu DK, Akl EA, Duda S, Solo K, Yaacoub S, Schünemann HJ, et al. Physical distancing,
                   face masks, and eye protection to prevent person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and
                   COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet. 2020;S0140673620311429.
              13.  Liang M, Gao L, Cheng C, Zhou Q, Uy JP, Heiner K, et al. Efficacy of face mask in
                   preventing respiratory virus transmission: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Travel
                   Med Infect Dis. 2020;36:101751.
              14.  Chou R, Dana T, Jungbauer R, Weeks C, McDonagh MS. Masks for Prevention of
                   Respiratory Virus Infections, Including SARS-CoV-2, in Health Care and Community
                   Settings: A Living Rapid Review. Ann Intern Med. 2020;
              15.  Bin-Reza F, Lopez Chavarrias V, Nicoll A, Chamberland ME. The use of masks and
                   respirators to prevent transmission of influenza: a systematic review of the scientific
                   evidence. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2012;6(4):257-267. doi:10.1111/j.1750-
                   2659.2011.00307.x
              16.  Reduction in COVID-19 infection using surgical facial masks outside.
                   https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04337541?term=mask+denmark&draw=2&rank=
              17.   Wang X, Ferro EG, Zhou G, Hashimoto D, Bhatt DL. Association Between Universal
                   Masking in a Health Care System and SARS-CoV-2 Positivity Among Health Care Workers.
                   JAMA. American Medical Association; 2020;324:703–4.
              18.   Xu J, Hussain S, Lu G, Zheng K, Wei S, Bao W, et al. Associations of Stay-at-Home Order
                   and Face-Masking Recommendation with Trends in Daily New Cases and Deaths of
                   Laboratory-Confirmed COVID-19 in the United States. Exploratory Research and Hypothesis
                   in Medicine. Xia & He Publishing Inc.; 2020;0:1–10.
              19.   Mitze T, Kosfeld R, Rode J, Wälde K. Face Masks Considerably Reduce COVID-19 Cases
                   in Germany: A Synthetic Control Method Approach. Institute of Labor Economics.
                   2020;13319.
              20.  Chernozhukov V, Kasahara H, Schrimpf P. Causal Impact of Masks, Policies, Behavior on
                   Early Covid-19 Pandemic in the U.S. medRxiv. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press;
                   2020;2020.05.27.20115139.
              21.  Coronavirus: Face masks and coverings to be compulsory in England’s shops. Accessed
                   07/09/2020. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-53397617
                                                                                                                              18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
              22. Face masks Scotland: when and where face coverings are mandatory: including new rules for
                   schools. Accessed 07/09/2020. https://www.scotsman.com/health/coronavirus/face-masks-
                   scotland-when-and-where-face-coverings-are-mandatory-including-new-rules-schools-
                   2875884
              23. What are the rules on face coverings in schools in Wales and Northern Ireland and will they
                   be needed in classrooms? Accessed 07/09/2020. https://metro.co.uk/2020/08/26/what-are-
                   rules-face-coverings-schools-wales-northern-ireland-will-students-have-wear-face-masks-
                   classroom-13180337/
              24. Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, et al. Early dynamics of transmission and control of
                   COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study [published correction appears in Lancet Infect
                   Dis. 2020 Mar 25;:]. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;20(5):553-558.
              25. Firth JA, Hellewell J, Klepac P, et al. Using a real-world network to model localized COVID-
                   19 control strategies [published online ahead of print, 2020 Aug 7]. Nat Med.
                   2020;10.1038/s41591-020-1036-8. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1036-8
              26. Kucharski AJ, Klepac P, Conlan AJK, et al. Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact
                   tracing, and physical distancing on reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in different
                   settings: a mathematical modelling study [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun
                   15]. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;S1473-3099(20)30457-6. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30457-6
              27. Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, et al. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by
                   isolation of cases and contacts [published correction appears in Lancet Glob Health. 2020
                   Mar 5;:]. Lancet Glob Health. 2020;8(4):e488-e496. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7
              28. Panovska-Griffiths J, Kerr CC, Stuart RM, et al. Determining the optimal strategy for
                   reopening schools, the impact of test and trace interventions, and the risk of occurrence of a
                   second COVID-19 epidemic wave in the UK: a modelling study [published online ahead of
                   print, 2020 Aug 3]. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2020;S2352-4642(20)30250-9.
                   doi:10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30250-9
              29. Flaxman S, Mishra S, Gandy A, et al. Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical
                   interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature. 2020;584(7820):257-261.
                   doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7
              30. Jarvis, C.I., Van Zandvoort, K., Gimma, A. et al. Quantifying the impact of physical distance
                   measures on the transmission of COVID-19 in the UK. BMC Med 18, 124 (2020).
                   https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01597-8 and continual work
                   https://cmmid.github.io/topics/covid19/comix-reports.html
              31. Kretzschmar ME, Rozhnova G, Bootsma MCJ, van Boven M, van de Wijgert JHM, Bonten
                   MJM. Impact of delays on effectiveness of contact tracing strategies for COVID-19: a
                   modelling study. The Lancet Public Health. (2020) Vol 5(8)E452-459. doi: 10.1016/S2468-
                   2667(20)30157-2
              32. Stutt ROJH, Retkute R, Bradley M, Gilligan CA, Colvin J. A modelling framework to assess
                   the likely effectiveness of facemasks in combination with 'lock-down' in managing the
                   COVID-19 pandemic. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci. 2020;476(2238):20200376.
                   doi:10.1098/rspa.2020.0376
              33. Eikenberry SE, Mancuso M, et al. To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face
                   mask use by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease
                   Modelling 5 (2020):293-308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.04.001
              34. Ngonghala CN, Iboi EA, Gumei AB. Could masks curtail the post-lockdown resurgence of
                   COVID-19 in the US? Math Biosc. (202): 329: 108452.
                   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2020.108452
              35. Aleta, A., Martín-Corral, D., Pastore y Piontti, A. et al. Modelling the impact of testing,
                   contact tracing and household quarantine on second waves of COVID-19. Nat Hum
                   Behav 4, 964–971 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0931-9.
              36. Kerr CC, Mistry D, Stuart RM, et al. Controling COVID-19 via test-trace-quarantine.
                   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.15.20154765
              37. Stuart RM, Abeysuriya RG, Kerr CC, et al. The role of masks in reducing the risk of new
                   waves of COVID-19 in low transmission settings: a modelling study. medRxiv preprint
                   doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.02.20186742.
                                                                                                                              19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
              38. Catching A, Capponi S, Te Yeh M, Biano S, Andino R. Examining face-mask usage as an
                   effective strategy to control COVID-19 spread. medRxiv preprint
                   doi:10.1101/2020.08.12.20173047
              39. Tatapudi H, Das R, Das TK. Impact Assessment of Full and Partial Stay-at-Home Orders,
                   face mask usage, and contact tracing: an agent-based simulation study of COVID-19 for an
                   urban region. medRxiv preprint doi:10.1101/2020.07.27.20163121
              40. Advice on the use of masks for children in the community in the context of COVID-19,
                   World Health Organization report. Accessed
                   07/09/2020.https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC_Masks-Children-
                   2020.1
              41. Viner RM, Mytton OT, et al. Susceptibility to and transmission of COVID-19 amongst children and
                   adolescents compared with adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. medRxiv preprint
                   doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.20108126
              42. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public: When and how to use masks. World
                   Health Organization report. Accessed
                   07/09/2020.https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-
                   public/when-and-how-to-use-masks
              43. Coronavirus: Face coverings U-turn for England’s secondary schools. Accessed 07/09/2020.
                   https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-53907035
              44. Coronavirus: Government research indicates secondary school pupils may pose greater virus
                   risk than primary students, reports suggest. Accessed 07/09/2020.
                   https://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/coronavirus-schools-primary-secondary-
                   pupils-risk-phe-latest-a9664086.html
              45. Smith LE, Amlôt R, Lambert H, Oliver I, Robin C, Yardley L, Rubin GJ. Factors associated
                   with adherence to self-isolation and lockdown measures in the UK; A cross-sectional survey.
                   Public Health 2020; 187:41-52.
              46. Smith LE, Potts HWW, Amlôt R, Fear NT, Michie S, Rubin GJ. Adherence to the test, trace
                   and isolate system: results from a time series of 21 nationally representative surveys in the
                   UK (the COVID-19 Rapid Survey of Adherence to Interventions and Responses [CORSAIR]
                   study). BMJ (submitted).
              47. Face coverings in education. Accessed 07/09/2020.
                   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/face-coverings-in-education/face-coverings-in-
                   education.
              48. COVID-19 Behaviour tracker. Imperial College London. Accessed 15/09/2020.
                   http://www.coviddatahub.com
              49. Growing number of Britons working from home, the Guardian article accessed 15/09/2020.
                   https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/jun/18/uk-working-from-home-ons-coronavirus-
                   businesses
              50. Weekly statistics for NHS Test and Trace (England) and coronavirus testing (UK). Accessed
                   15/09/2020. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/nhs-test-and-trace-statistics-england-
                   weekly-reports
              51. 25. Gao Z, Xu Y, Sun C, Wang X, Guo Y, Qiu S, Ma K. A systematics review of asymptomatic
                   infections with COVID-19. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.05.001 (Epub
                   ahead of print)
         Data availability
         The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author
         upon reasonable request.
         Code availability
         The code used to run all simulations contained in this paper is available from
         https://github.com/Jasminapg/Covid-19-Analysis.
                                                                                                                              20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         Acknowledgements
         We would like to acknowledge Prof Graham Medley (LSHTM) and Dr Edwin van Leeuwen
         (Public Health England) for helpful discussions around the modelling scenarios. WW
         acknowledges the support of the Chief Scientist Office (COV/EDI/20/12).
         Author contributions
         JPG conceived the study and developed the specific modelling framework, based on the
         Covasim model developed by CCK, RMS, DM and DJK. JPG, DF, WW, CCK, RMS, DM
         and DJK collated data for the parameters used. JPG ran the modelling analysis with input
         from WW, CCK, DM and RMS. JPG, CB and RV defined the different scenarios in the UK
         context following conversations with scientific advisors within SPI-M and SPI-B. JPG wrote
         the manuscript with input from CB, RV, WW, CCK, RMS, DM, DF and DJK. All authors
         approved the final version.
         Competing interests
         The authors have no competing interests to declare.
         Material & Correspondence
         Correspondence to Jasmina Panovska-Griffiths j.panovska-griffiths@ucl.ac.uk
         Supplementary material
         Figure S1: Heatmaps of the peaks of new infections for different trace (x-axis) and test (y-
         axis) levels across the scenario of masks wear in parts of community with and without
         schools masks’ wear. Higher values of the peak of new infections are shown in darker shades
         of red, while lower values are lighter colours with a light orange colour representing a region

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          within where the resurgence of COVID-19 is controlled with combinations of adequate test-
          trace and mask wear.
          Figure S2: Heatmaps of the cumulative deaths for different trace (x-axis) and test (y-axis)
          levels across the scenario of masks wear in parts of community with and without schools
          masks’ wear. Higher cumulative deaths are shown in darker shades of red, while lower values
          are lighter colours with a light orange colour representing a region within where the
          resurgence of COVID-19 is controlled with combinations of adequate test-trace and mask
          wear.
          Calibration of the model
          Initial seeding of infectious persons on 21/02/2020              1500
                                                                           0.0071967
             in March                                                      0.009
             in April                                                      0.013
             in May                                                        0.026
             in June                                                       0.0277
             in July and August                                            0.0277
               in May and June                                             0.00075
          Table S1: Parameters fitted during the calibration.
                                                    Disease Duration Parameters
Parameter Description                                                   Distribution (mean, std)           Source
            Length of time after exposure before an                                                        [1-5]
            individual is infectious (i.e. has begun viral
            shedding)

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
      ଵ      Length of time after viral shedding has begun                 ଵ ~           1, 0.9    [1,7]
             before an individual has symptoms
      ଶ      Length of time after symptoms appear before                  ଶ ~          6.6, 4.9    [7]
             they become severe and the person requires
             critical care
      ଷ      Length of time after severe symptoms appear                   ଷ ~           3, 7.4    [8]
             before the person requires critical care
    ௔       Recovery time for asymptomatic cases                          ௔ ~           8, 2     [6]
   ௠        Recovery time for mild cases                                  ௠ ~           8, 2     [6]
     ௦      Recovery time for severe cases                              ௦ ~          14, 2.4     [5]
    ௖       Recovery time for critical cases                            ௖ ~           14, 2.4    [5]
           Table S2: Disease duration parameters, in days, used in simulations. This table is modified
           from [36], which describes the Covasim model in more detail.
                                                        Age-linked Disease Parameters
Parameter 0-9                10-19          20-29       30-39          40-49          50-59          60-69       70-79         80+
  ௦௨௦       0.34            0.67           1.00        1.00           1.00           1.00           1.00        1.24          1.47
  ௦௬௠       0.50            0.55           0.60        0.65           0.70           0.75           0.80        0.85          0.90
  ௦௘௩       0.0005          0.0065         0.0072      0.0208         0.03430        0.0765         0.1328      0.2066        0.2457
   ௖௥௜      0.00003         0.00008        0.00036     0.00104        0.00216        0.00933        0.03639     0.08923       0.1742
 ௗ௘௔௧௛      0.00002         0.00006        0.00030     0.00080        0.00150        0.00600        0.02200     0.05100       0.09300
            1.00            1.00           1.00        1.00           1.00           1.00           1.00        1.00          1.00
           Table S3: Age-linked disease parameters used in simulations. This table is borrowed from
           [36] describes the Covasim model in more detail. Key: psus: odds ratio of developing
           symptoms; psym: probability of developing symptoms; psev: probability of developing severe
           symptoms (i.e., sufficient to justify hospitalization); pcri: probability of developing into a
           critical case (i.e., sufficient to require ICU); pdeath: probability of death.
           References:
           1. Lauer, S. A., Grantz, K. H., Bi, Q., Jones, F. K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H. R., Azman, A. S., Reich,
           N. G., & Lessler, J. (2020). The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) From
           Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. In Ann Intern Med.
           https://doi.org/10.7326/m20-0504
           2. Pung, R., Chiew, C. J., Young, B. E., Chin, S., Chen, M. I. C., Clapham, H. E., Cook, A. R.,
           Maurer-Stroh, S., Toh, M. P. H. S., Poh, C., Low, M., Lum, J., Koh, V. T. J., Mak, T. M., Cui, L.,
           Lin, R. V. T. P., Heng, D., Leo, Y.-S., Lye, D. C., ... Ang, L. W. (2020). Investigation of three clusters
           of COVID-19 in Singapore: Implications for surveillance and response measures. In The Lancet (Vol.
           395, Issue 10229, pp. 1039–1046). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30528-6
           3. Du, Z., Xu, X., Wu, Y., Wang, L., Cowling, B. J., & Meyers, L. A. (2020). Serial Interval of
           COVID-19 among Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases. In Emerg Infect Dis (Vol. 26, Issue 6).
           https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2606.200357
                                                                                                                               23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.28.20202937.this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
         4. Nishiura, H., Linton, N. M., & Akhmetzhanov, A. R. (2020). Serial interval of novel coronavirus
         (COVID-19) infections. In Int J Infect Dis (Vol. 93, pp. 284–286).
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.060
         5. Verity, R., Okell, L. C., Dorigatti, I., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Imai, N., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G.,
         Thompson, H., Walker, P. G. T., Fu, H., Dighe, A., Griffin, J. T., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S.,
         Boonyasiri, A., Cori, A., Cucunubá, Z., FitzJohn, R., Gaythorpe, K., ... Ferguson, N. M. (2020).
         Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: A model-based analysis. In The Lancet
         Infectious Diseases. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30243-7
         6. Wolfel, R., Corman, V. M., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M., Zange, S., Muller, M. A., Niemeyer,
         D., Jones, T. C., Vollmar, P., Rothe, C., Hoelscher, M., Bleicker, T., Brunink, S., Schneider, J.,
         Ehmann, R., Zwirglmaier, K., Drosten, C., & Wendtner, C. (2020). Virological assessment of
         hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. In Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
         7. Linton NM, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, Hayashi K, Akhmetzhanov AR, Jung S-M, et al. Incubation
         period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with right
         truncation: A statistical analysis of publicly available case data. J Clin Med 2020;9(2)E538,
         doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ jcm9020538.
         8. Wang, D., Hu, B., Hu, C., Zhu, F., Liu, X., Zhang, J., et al. (2020b). Clinical characteristics of 138
         hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 323,
         1061–1069. doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.1585
                                                                                                                              24
