medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
   Prioritisation of population groups with the most interactions for
   COVID-19 vaccination can substantially reduce total fatalities
   Jorge Rodríguez1,2*, Mauricio Patón1 and Juan M Acuña2
   1
     Department of Chemical Engineering. College of Engineering. Khalifa University.
   SAN Campus PO Box 2533 Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
   2
     Department of Epidemiology and Public Health. College of Medicine. Khalifa University.
   PO Box 127788 Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
   *
     Corresponding author: jorge.rodriguez@ku.ac.ae
   Abstract
   The rapid development of vaccines against the SARS-CoV-2 virus is an unprecedented
   achievement. Once vaccines become mass produced, they will have to be distributed to almost
   the entire population to prevent deaths and permit prompt economic recovery. The necessity to
   vaccinate a large number of people in a short period of time, and possibly with insufficient
   vaccine doses to cover most, creates in itself a new challenge for governments and health
   authorities: which population groups (by age or other criteria) should be targeted first and what
   sequence must be followed, if any at all, to achieve the minimum number of fatalities? In this
   work, we demonstrate the importance and impact of optimally planning the priorities for vaccine
   deployment by population groups using a modified SEIR-type model for the COVID-19 outbreak
   considering age-related groups. Finding the absolute guaranteed best solution of the
   mathematical optimisation problem may be hard, if even possible, and would likely require
   intense computational resources for every possible case study scenario. In this work, several
   strategies are evaluated and compared, in an attempt to approach the most effective possible
   vaccination priority sequence in an example case study using demographic and epidemiological
   data from Spain. The minimum total fatalities at the end of the vaccination campaign is the
   objective pursued. The population groups classifications are established based on relevant
   differences in mortality (due to their age) and risk-related behaviour such as their number of
   daily person-to-person interactions. Assuming a capacity limited constant vaccination rate,
   vaccination distribution strategies were evaluated for different vaccine effectiveness levels and
   different percentages of final vaccine population coverage. Our results unambiguously show how
   planning vaccination by priority groups can achieve dramatic reductions in total fatalities (more
   than 70% in some cases) compared to no prioritisation. The results also indicate in all cases, for
   all vaccine effectiveness and coverage values evaluated, that the criteria for groups vaccination
   priority should not be those with the highest mortality but rather those the highest number of
   daily person-to-person interactions. Strikingly, our results show in all cases, that prioritisation of
   groups with the highest mortality but less social interactions, may lead to significantly larger
   numbers of final total fatalities, even higher as if no group priorities were established at all. The
   explanation, clearly displayed by the mechanistic model, is that vaccination avoids infections that
   reduce mortality not only from the vaccinated group itself but also from the projected secondary
   and subsequent infections inflicted on the rest of the population by those vaccinated in that
   group. Precisely this amplification effect (exponential nature of the curve) appears to cause the
   larger reduction in total fatalities if the groups with the most interactions are vaccinated first.
   The possible contradiction of these results with some published recommendations highlight the
   importance of conducting an open comprehensive and rigorous analysis of this problem leaving
   behind any subjective preconceptions.
     NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Introduction
COVID-19 has inflicted great stress worldwide with more than 37 million cases and 920 thousand
deaths globally as of October 12, 2020. (JHCRC 2020). Despite a tendency to a decrease in the
number of cases per day in many countries, and even regions in the world, the pandemic is not near
its end and the disease will probably not go away, becoming endemic in many regions throughout
the world. In this scenario, the development of adequate vaccines is an alternative for primary
prevention of the disease, so far implemented through hygiene, social isolation, social distancing,
and quarantine. Vaccines then are the next best hope for the world in the COVID-19 pandemic.
    Vaccines, of different types, are products of biotechnological processes and their development
and approval is long, taking on average several years. This was the rule until now: in an
unprecedented global effort from pharma and academia, supported by government and private
organizations, streamlined regulation and financial investment have made possible that one or
more COVID-19 vaccines may become available during early 2021. Although the tremendous speed
with which COVID-19 vaccines are being approved and trials implemented, and the scientific world
concerns about the science, the politics, and the economics of such speedy processes, it is probably
unavoidable that one or more vaccines will become available soon.
    With more than 320 candidates and 76 trials now underway (15 in phase I; 25 in phase I/II; 4 in
phase II; 2 in phase II/III; and 13 in phase III), registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, the next problems to
sort out will probably be mass production of the vaccine and how to determine the vaccine
availability for potential users. (Krammer 2020; Parker et al., 2020).
    The WHO issued a draft statement on September 9, 2020, addressing issues related to the fair
allocation of vaccines for countries around the world. Available doses of COVID-19 vaccines
worldwide are proposed to be managed centrally and equitably by the COVAX Access Mechanism,
a coalition of member countries together with the ACT-Accelerator Collaboration (WHO; the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation; Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; the Global Fund; the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations -CEPI; and Welcome Trust) (WHO, 2020a) to allow fair allocation of
available vaccines. However, in the same statement, the country allocation of vaccines provided to
each one of the countries will be driven by each country itself.
    Despite the estimated and unprecedented fast production of vaccines, and mostly due to the
immense need for potential users (the vast majority of the population worldwide is still susceptible
to the infection), vaccines provided will be insufficient. The COVAX initiative (WHO 2020a) proposes
vaccine doses for each country to cover 3% to 20% of the population proportionally to each country,
in two phases. However, it specifically does not address intra-country distributions for each
country’s population. And despite adequate world-wide equitable distribution, the final impact of
the vaccine administration to populations will be dependent then, only on the internal country
distribution specifically. With the limited availability forecasted (having the capacity of progressively
covering 3 to 20% of the population for most countries) the internal distribution within each country
becomes paramount in the final effect of the vaccination campaign for COVID-19 and the impact it
will have in each country population. There is no doubt that vaccine uptake will be an important
driver (Mello et al., 2020) however, intra-country capacity for adequate vaccine distribution will be
essential and will most likely impact the final amount of deaths related to COVID-19 (Schwartz 2020).
    Some of the important drivers for vaccine allocation seem to rise from ethical principles. (Field
et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2020). For instance, as stated by Emmanuel et al.(2020), these ethical
principles point towards first, reducing premature deaths; then, reducing economic and social
serious deprivations and last, focus on return to functional populations and societies. However, as
disputed the order and scope of these principles may be, we do agree that the immediate need of
decreasing COVID-19 deaths (direct and indirect) that may be avoidable, is the first priority.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
  preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
     The empiric decisions in a pandemic are a luxury not always possible. In these cases,
mathematical modelling might guide immediate decisions, such as the impact of non-
pharmaceutical interventions (Rodríguez et al. 2020) or in this case vaccine prioritization,
fundamentally based on trying to avoid premature, preventable deaths. Under stable conditions of
capacity and resources, and the capacity of public health systems to adapt to COVID-19 (WHO
2020b), these deaths (in number) are linked to the number of cases and the severity of disease: the
more cases and the more severe they are, the higher the number of deaths. The number of cases,
in turn, is related to the serial interval (usually stable throughout the infection) (Nishiura et al., 2020)
and the Reproductive Number (R0) of the disease, or better, the effective Reproductive Number (Rt)
if we consider this indicator an active one as opposed to a passive one) (Cori et al., 2020). Most
countries have managed statistics for COVID-19, the number of factors involved in the calculation
of Rt and of the number of deaths is complex due to multifactorial associations of factors causing
deaths. Also vaccination will change in real-time the characteristics of the population, changing the
Rt and the probability of death as time elapses in the vaccination campaigns. It is easy to conclude
then that in view of this, a fixed approach during a prolonged amount of time during for vaccine
distribution within countries, will not produce the best possible results in averting the highest
potential number of preventable deaths by vaccination.
     The COVID-19 outbreak has brought unprecedented attention to mathematical modelling, with
the development of several epidemic models trying to forecast the extent of the pandemic (Gatto
et al., 2020; Giordano et al., 2020; Hellewell et al., 2020; Kissler et al., 2020; Kucharski et al., 2020;
Roosa et al., 2020; Wilder et al., 2020). Some previous SEIR models already evaluated vaccination
strategies for infectious diseases (Wang et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2016). Due to the attention drawn
from the COVID-19 outbreak, additional models have been developed to evaluate vaccination
strategies against SASRS-CoV-2. The goal of these models is to elucidate which strategy might be
best for vaccinating the population with the objective of reducing the number of fatalities and/or
hospitalized people (Bubar et al., 2020; Matrajt et al., 2020). Mathematical models of the COVID-
19 vaccination that allow for the input of real-time information can be important to minimise the
number of fatalities. By using such models, the vaccination campaigns may change directionality in
allocation as needed and as indicated by the changing characteristics of the population due to the
vaccination itself.
     In this work, a new COVID-19 SEIR-type model, based on that by Rodríguez et al. (2020)
segregated by population groups, is applied to solve the problem of determining the best sequence
of priority population groups that should be followed for vaccination. Although slightly different
optimisation goals are possible, in this work the minimum total fatalities at the end of the
vaccination campaign is the pursued goal. Model-based optimisation is applied to an example with
demographic and epidemiological data from Spain.
Dynamic model of the COVID-19 outbreak including vaccination
In our previous work (Rodríguez et al., 2020) a model was developed to describe the impact of
interventions with population groups segregated by age. The model, originally designed to evaluate
the impact of a number of interventions on the outbreak dynamics and outcome, captures the
differences in severity, mortality and infection risk-related behaviour of different population groups
by age. Based on that work a new model is presented suitable for its application to the problem of
optimum vaccine allocation optimisation at hand. In the new model, the individuals are segregated
by population groups, still related to their age, however other arbitrary classifications based on their
activity and epidemiological differences are also possible. This could include groups such as front
line workers, individuals with a very high risk of mortality etc. Individuals in the population belong

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
to only one single group that they never abandon and transition through infection severity stages
eventually joining the immune recovered pool.
   Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the different stages and transitions among them
for the individuals in the different (age-related) population groups. The incorporation of vaccination
causes individuals to transition to vaccinated immune or to ineffectively vaccinated not-immune
stages. A complete comprehensive description of the model is presented in the Appendix including
complete detailed reproducible descriptions of all equations, variables and parameters.
   The model classifies individuals in the population in compartments by infection stage and (age-
related) population group. In order to ensure maximum utilisation of information, either available
or measurable and to minimise uncertainty, the population grouping should be defined, and it is in
this case, based on meaningful epidemiological differences between individuals in severity and
mortality as well as in behaviour or activity traits affecting risk of infection. These later could include
traits such as the number and types (with which other groups) of daily contacts, their differences in
awareness and protection attitudes, etc. The rates of infection and vaccination, together with the
available recent clinical and epidemiological information, govern the transitions of individuals
between disease stages and allow for the evaluation of the objective function of total fatalities at
the end of the vaccination campaign. The model implementation can be fully customised with the
specific population characteristics and parameters of any community, region or country for its
application to determine their optimum vaccination plan.
                                                                                                                                                                          Vaccinated
                                                                    EFFECTIVE                                                                                              Immune
                                                                   VACCINATION                                                                                               (IV)
                                                          fr_ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (R)
                                                                                                                                                                              Recovered & Immune (IR)
                                    Pre-Symptomatic
                                                                                        fr_ps
                     INFECTION                                      Pre-Symptomatic
                                                                                                Symptomatic (S)
                                    non infectious (PS)
                                                    NI
                                                          fps_ni                                                  fr_s
                                                                      infectious (PS)
                                                                                        fs_ps
    INEFFECTIVE                                                                                                                          fr_sh
                                                                                                                          Hospitalised
    VACCINATION                                                                                                   fsh_s      (SH)                                 fr_sc
                                                                                                                                         fsc_sh   Critical (SC)
                                                                                                                                                                  fd_sc   Deceased (D)
   Figure 1. Representation of the model transitions of individuals through the infection stages. Only
   contacts of healthy susceptible individuals with infectious either pre-symptomatic or symptomatic
   individuals can lead to infection. Vaccination, if effective, avoids infection and places individuals at
   immune vaccinated stage. Ineffective vaccination maintains individuals in their current stage (they are
   however accounted separately as already vaccinated).
   In the example to be presented for Spain, population groups were defined by (age-related)
activity as namely: preschool children (ages 0-4); school children (ages 5-14); higher school and
university young (ages 15-24), young workers (ages 25-49); mature workers (ages 50-59); senior
workers (ages 60-64); early retired (ages 65-69); retired (ages 70-79); elderly (ages 80+). This groups’
definition is arbitrary but it takes into account the above mentioned criteria for group definitions

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
  preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                    perpetuity.
                                       It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
for impact on the final objective. The group definitions can be changed to best suit any country or
region specifics, as long and good quality data are available for their characterisation.
      Individuals never leave the (age-related) population group to which they belong and, at a given
time, they sit on one of the possible infection stages. These stages are defined in terms of
infectiousness and severity of symptoms analogously as in Rodríguez et al. (2020), namely: healthy
susceptible (H); infected non-symptomatic non-infectious (NI); pre-symptomatic infectious (PS);
symptomatic infectious (S); in need of hospitalisation (SH); in need of critical care (SC); recovered
immune (IR) and deceased (D), in addition those effectively vaccinated become vaccinated immune
(V). Individuals ineffectively vaccinated (i.e. the vaccine does not immunise them) maintain their
current stage and they are simply accounted as is that stage but already vaccinated (see Figure 1).
      The transitions between stages are determined by rates of infection, disease progression and
vaccination. Figure 2 provides an overview representation of the stage transitions as modelled.
Complete details are included in the Appendix model description
              Healthy       Non infectious             Infectious          Infectious       Symptomatic         Symptomatic
                                                                                                                                 Deceased
           Susceptible     pre-symptomatic pre-symptomatic Symptomatic                      Hospitalised           Critical
                                                                                                                                    (D)
                (H)                (NI)                   (PS)                 (S)             (SH)                 (SC)
                       INFECTION            TRANSITION          TRANSITION         TRANSITION           TRANSITION          DEATH
  INEFFECTIVE
 VACCINATION
                                                                           Immune
                                                                       Recovered (IR)
                              EFFECTIVE                             & Vaccinated (IV)
                             VACCINATION
      Figure 2. Schematic representation of the transition rates between stages. Individuals spend in each stage
      an average amount of time depending on their transition path towards recovery or increased severity.
Model limitations and assumptions
The model presented above and fully described in the Appendix was specifically developed for the
optimum vaccination problem at hand. The model shares many of the fundamental characteristics
of compartment SEIR-type models and its limitations remain similar as for earlier models (Rodríguez
et al., 2020). It is based on dynamic balances of individuals in compartments classified by their stage
of infection and segregated by age-related groups. In this type of models all individuals are
considered located in a common single domain or closed community (e.g. a well-mixed city or town).
      The model is completely deterministic, has a moderate complexity and is computationally
inexpensive to solve and requires only parameters that are mechanistic and carry meaning and
interpretation. Most of these parameters can be directly estimated from epidemiological and
clinical data and their calibration is not recommended. Analogous to similar compartmental SEIR-
type models, variables and parameters refer to representative averages for each compartment
stage and population group. These characteristics may limit the model representation of non-linear
relevant phenomena that may occur in the real-world reality. Examples of these include phenomena
like the so-called super spread events or other location specific phenomena and cannot be captured
by these types of models. Any quantitative application of the model for prediction purposes in public
health should be accompanied by a critical discussion against these limitations (Wearing et al., 2005).

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    No geographical clustering or separation, neither any form of migration in or out of the
community are captured by this type of models. Large cities with ample use of public transportation
remain the best described by this and other SEIR-type disease propagation models. The model, as
described above and in full in the Appendix, is applied under specific assumptions, relevant to the
vaccination problem at hand, including:
✓All ever-infected individuals that recover become fully immune, irrespective of their severity path,
and cannot be infected or infectious again.
✓ No differences in immunity or any other epidemiological aspect are considered between
individuals never vaccinated and those ineffectively vaccinated.
✓ Recovered individuals (aware or not) are equally eligible for vaccination as healthy susceptible.
✓ The rates of vaccination of the groups activated (i.e. called for vaccination) are proportional to
their relative sizes in terms of eligible individuals pending vaccination. The total vaccination rate
must match the given rate limited by the capacity of the health system.
Optimisation of the vaccine deployment by population groups
In order to find the optimum sequence of vaccination in terms of which population groups should be
targeted at each specific moment, it is necessary to solve an optimisation problem. All optimisation
problems consist of a target objective to make minimum (e.g. number of total fatalities at the end of
the campaign) and a set of decision variables that can be manipulated to achieve that, in this case the
populations groups called for vaccination at any given time. Once the problem is defined, the optimum
set of decision variables is computationally sought following a suitable existing optimisation method
from literature or developed ad hoc. The nature of the optimisation problem at hand falls within an
type of problems called dynamic programming problems. In this type of problems as it is the case
here, the decision variables (in our case the active groups called for vaccination as defined in the fv
vector of ones and zeros) are not constant but change over time. This adds additional potential
complexity as not only an optimum group or set of groups needs to be found but this needs to be
done at each moment and changes in time. For a specific period one group(s) may the optimum target
but, after some time, another group(s) may become the most useful to target for vaccination.
Objective function – Optimisation goal
Several different objective functions can be defined for minimisation depending on the priorities
followed. In the example case study presented, the objective will be to minimise the total number
of fatalities at one month after the vaccination campaign is completed (tf). The definition of the
optimisation problem will therefore consist of
                               Minimise i Ndi(tf) as a function of the dynamic values of fvi(t)
                               such that t [0,tf] , fvi  {0,1}
    Alternative formulations of the objective function are possible, for example, the total number of
years of healthy life lost at (tf) could be the target to minimise or even factoring economic losses or
other terms of relevance to public health could be included. There is ample flexibility to define the
problem as convenient using this framework and model.
    The model itself allows for the simultaneous dynamic optimisation of vaccination together with
the application of interventions over time (such as e.g. isolation of specific groups) and therefore
can applied to evaluate specific scenarios combining interventions and vaccination strategies.
    A plethora of optimisation approaches can be proposed and attempted to achieve the best
possible results given this and any optimisation problem. These methods can be completely

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
algorithmic, both deterministic or with randomness and also incorporate heuristic elements. All
these possible methods differ in their computational requirements and their performance can
always be compared in terms of the final value for the objective function they manage to reach.
Computationally intensive methods, however, rapidly bring in limitations to conduct e.g. sensitivity
analysis or Monte Carlo simulations of the model parameters for increased confidence as they
require long computing times per single parameter set evaluation. Taking this into consideration, a
computationally inexpensive heuristic optimisation method, based on the R number and groups
mortalities, was devised in view of the simulation results obtained by other more computational
intense methods.
Heuristic R-based optimum path (HRBOP) strategy for vaccination
A heuristic R-based optimum path (HRBOP) strategy was developed that establishes the vaccination
priority at any given time on the group with the highest projected mortality per infection avoided
via vaccination. That mortality is however accounted from two sources and not only from the
group’s itself, the projected secondary and subsequent infections inflicted on the entire population
by the avoided infection in the group, are also estimated and accounted for.
    Under the HRBOP strategy, priority is directed at any given moment to the vaccination of the
group i with the highest number of projected avoidable deaths per vaccination (see Eq. 1). This is
calculated as a function of three elements, namely (i) the risk of infection in that group (as the ratio
of the rate of infections and the number of individuals in the group); (ii) the mortality per infection
in the group (fd_nii) and (iii) the projected secondary and subsequent infections an infected group
member would inflict on the entire population.
    If the R number is accepted as a good estimator of infection propagation at a given moment, the
last term (the projected secondary infections) can be estimated if group-specific detailed
information about the ongoing R number is available such that a matrix of R numbers between
groups (RM) can be built. This matrix can then be projected to any number of infection cycles (n) by
powering the matrix to n.
    All these three terms could therefore in principle be measured or estimated from actual data
directly collected by the health systems in a community, making no model required to apply the
HRBOP strategy.
    The calculation of the projected avoidable deaths for all population groups (PADv), in terms of
the model variables, is presented in Eq. 1 (see also Appendix). Eq. 1 was used to evaluate the HRBOP
method against the alternatives for the case study example for Spain. A value of three infection
cycles (n=3) was used.
                                           PADv = (ri_h ./ Nsv) .* [RM(9x9)n+I(9x9)]* fd_ni                          (Eq. 1)
where I(9x9) is the identity matrix of the indicated size.
    Although the HRBOP strategy is demonstrated here on the dynamic model, its practical
implementation does not require or rely on any model, partly decoupling the outcome sequence of
priority groups from possible model shortcomings and uncertainties.
    Used in conjunction with a dynamic model, the HRBOP method is computationally inexpensive
as it runs in one single model simulation through its so-called optimum path. There is no
requirement for repeated model simulations to evaluate the objective function for changes in
vaccination sequence. The computational low cost allows for its use in conjunction with sensitivity
and Monte Carlo simulations of the vaccination sequence outcome against uncertain model
parameters.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
  preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                 perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
     A final advantage of the low computational requirement of the HRBOP method is that it allows
for its deployment together with the model on low cost web-based platforms, making a vaccination
optimisation method available globally at no cost.
Comparison of vaccine distribution strategies (case study for Spain)
Five different strategies for vaccination of the population are evaluated for comparison for a case
example using the population demographics and epidemiological data from Spain, namely:
i) No group prioritisation: all population in all groups is called for vaccination in equal terms.
ii) Priority to the groups with the highest mortality per infection (from highest to lowest). Groups
are called one by one and only once until coverage for each group is reached (single call)
iii) Priority to the groups with the highest number of interactions (daily contacts) (from highest to
lowest). Groups are called one by one and only once until coverage is reached (single call).
iv) HRBOP strategy (heuristic R-based optimum vaccination path). Groups can be called for a period
and be recalled at later stages more than one time with flexibility partial group vaccination.
v) The best of all the possible sequences of groups priority. Groups are called one by one and only
once until coverage is reached. This apporach requires intensive computation as all the possible
combinations between all groups need to be evaluated (9! = 362,880 simulations)
     The parameters as shown in Table S1 and Tables S3.a-b were used with the following initial
conditions and assumptions:
      ▪ No pre-existing immunity, (i.e. Nirini = 0).
      ▪ No initial vaccinated individuals and fatalities.
      ▪ Initial case incidence of 0.1% for NI and S and 0.3% for PS respect to the entire population.
      ▪ All remaining population initially considered as healthy susceptible (H).
      ▪ A total population of 47,026,208 as for Spain in 2019 is considered.
      ▪ Constant rate of vaccination of 1% of the population per day until campaign ends.
      ▪ Different vaccine effectiveness and maximum population coverage are evaluated.
     Figure 3 shows the results for the five strategies, in terms of proposed sequence of priority
groups for vaccination as well as the progression in total fatalities and R number with time, for a
vaccine effectiveness of 75% and a maximum population coverage of 80%. A summary of all results
obtained for nine combinations of these two parameters is presented in Table 1.
   Table 1. Performance results of different strategies for vaccine distribution at different vaccine
                                       effectiveness and coverage of the population.
                   Maximum                   No           Highest-to-        Most-to-    Heuristic        Best of         Lowest
    Vaccine
                   Population          Prioritisation       Lowest             Least      R-based       All Possible     fatalities
 Effectiveness
                    Coverage             by Groups         Mortality      Interactions      Path        Sequences        achieved
                                     (Final fatalities)               (Percentage change in fatalities)              (Final fatalities)
      100%             95%                 42,494            15.8%            -61.9%       -65.2%          -72.0%         11,915
      100%             80%                 42,692            16.5%            -63.1%       -64.6%          -71.6%         12,142
      100%             50%                 45,254            36.2%            -55.3%       -55.9%          -59.7%         18,244
      75%              95%                 70,998            12.1%            -65.4%       -65.6%          -73.8%         18,582
      75%              80%                 71,265            11.6%            -63.5%       -64.0%          -71.7%         20,150
      75%              50%                 74,942            19.2%            -45.2%       -45.7%          -50.3%         37,215
      50%              95%                 109,867            6.0%            -40.6%       -41.0%          -52.7%         51,954
      50%              80%                 110,138            5.4%            -36.6%       -37.2%          -46.8%         58,607
      50%              50%                 113,998            8.5%            -21.6%       -21.9%          -26.0%         84,342

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Figure 3. Compared vaccination strategies showing active groups called for vaccination, fatalities and R value
over time for the case study with data and demographics from Spain. Constant vaccination rate is set at 1%
of the total population per day, vaccine effectiveness is 75% and population coverage is 80%. The best result
was obtained after (computationally intensive) evaluation of all possible group sequences (assuming only
one single call per group). The computationally inexpensive heuristic R-based optimum path is evaluated for
weekly cycles and allows for multiple partial calls to any specific group.
    The different strategies proposed lead to very different and significant impacts respect to the
baseline number of predicted fatalities if no group prioritisation is implemented. If a strategy based
on priority to the groups with the highest mortality is followed, the predicted total number of
fatalities actually increases significantly (~12% higher). On the contrary, if priority is established to
those groups with the most interactions (from highest to lowest), dramatic reductions in fatalities
(~63% lower) are predicted (Table 1). If the optimum strategy is further refined using the HRBOP

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
method, additional smaller improvements can be achieved. Finally if intensive computational
resources are available the best of all possible (single group call) sequences among all possible ones
can be sought using a model. In this case, the best result was obtained in this manner (~72% lower
number of fatalities). The HRBOP and the best of all sequences found differ very little from the one
of groups from highest to lowest number of interactions. This trend of reductions and differences
between the strategies remains consistent for different vaccine effectiveness and population
coverage values (Table 1). The detailed simulation results analogous to those in Figure 3 for all
combinations are presented in Figures S1-9 in the Supplementary Information.
    It is important to note that the above results strongly indicate that in principle, and
independently from the availability of a calibrated model and computational resources, following a
strategy of priority to population groups with the most interactions or a similar more refined
sequence obtained by the HRBOP method, can achieve enormous reductions in total fatalities at
the end of the vaccination campaign.
Conclusions
The dynamic deterministic model developed, describing individuals in (age-segregated) population
groups and disease stages, can be applied to the evaluation of vaccination strategies. The model
results appear to describe expected trends and allow for deep mechanistic analyses to draw
hypotheses and conclusions that can inform public health policy.
    Our results strongly suggest that a planned vaccine distribution following prioritised sequences
of population groups can achieve enormous reductions is the final number of fatalities at the end
of the vaccination campaign. Based on the results we strongly advice against a group prioritisation
criterion based on mortality only that ignores the group’s level of interaction with others. The
criteria of priority to those groups with the highest number of interactions (daily person to person
contacts) appears as the one with the highest immediate payoff in terms of reduction of the final
number of fatalities. The computationally-inexpensive model-independent heuristic R-based
optimum path method proposed achieved moderate improvements on the final number of fatalities
respect to the prioritisation strategy of highest to lowest interactions. Both these strategies do not
differ by much from the model-based computationally-intensive evaluation of the best group
priority sequence among all possible ones.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Appendix - Dynamic COVID-19 model description
The definition of the model dynamic (state) variables is shown in Table A1. Each variable
corresponds to the number of individuals in that stage in a vector per (age-related) population group
(9 activity groups as defined above). Under this structure, each dynamic variable is a vector of
dimension 1x9, and the total number of states is a matrix of dimensions 15x9 (15 stages and 9
population groups). Vector variables and parameters are represented in bold font and scalar ones
in regular font across all the manuscript.
   Table A1. Model dynamic variables accounting for the number of individuals in each infection
                                                           stage and group.
            Definition “Number of individuals…”                          Vector per group Total from all groups
                                                                            (1x15 vector)
            Healthy susceptible to infection                                     Nh                       NhT
            Non-infectious pre-symptomatic                                       Nni                      NniT
            Infectious pre-symptomatic                                           Nps                     NpsT
            Infectious symptomatic                                               Ns                       NsT
            Requiring hospitalisation                                            Nsh                     NshT
            Requiring critical care                                              Nsc                      NscT
            Recovered & immune                                                   Nir                      NirT
            Vaccinated still susceptible to infection                            Nhv                     NhvT
            Vaccinated Non-infectious pre-symptomatic                           Nniv                     NnivT
            Vaccinated Infectious pre-symptomatic                               Npsv                     NpsvT
            Vaccinated Infectious symptomatic                                    Nsv                      NsvT
            Vaccinated Requiring hospitalisation                                Nshv                     NshvT
            Vaccinated Requiring critical care                                  Nscv                     NscvT
            Vaccinated immune                                                    Niv                      NivT
            Deceased                                                             Nd                       NdT
Rates of transition between infection stages
The progression of individuals across stages, as illustrated in Figure 1, includes the impact of
vaccination bringing individuals directly into an immune stage or, if ineffectively vaccinated,
remaining in their current stage. The transitions between stages are governed by the rates of infection,
disease transition and vaccination shown in Table A2. All the rates are in vectors with each element
corresponding to the rate for each age-related population group.
    The average rates of transition between stages are defined as per the latest epidemiological and
clinical data and they can be updated as knowledge of the disease increases and treatments
improve. These parameters include the proportion of individuals that transition to a more severe
stage or recover (Table A3) and the average times reported at each stage before transition or
recovery (Table A4).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    Table A2. Rates of infection and transition between states in vectors per population group.
         Definition “Rate of …”                                                           Variable Units
         Infection by interaction with infectious pre-symptomatic                              ri_ps    # H infected/day
         Infection by interaction with infectious symptomatic                                   ri_s    # H infected/day
         Transition from non-infectious to infectious pre-symptomatic                         rps_ni    # NI to PS / day
         Transition from pre-symptomatic to symptomatic                                        rs_ps    # PS to S / day
         Transition from symptomatic to hospitalised                                           rsh_s    # S to SH / day
         Transition from hospitalised to critical                                             rsc_sh    # SH to SC / day
         Transition from critical to deceased                                                 rd_sc     # SC to D / day
         Recovery from pre-symptomatic non-infectious                                          rr_ni    # NI to R / day
         Recovery from pre-symptomatic infectious                                              rr_ps    # PS to R / day
         Recovery from symptomatic                                                              rr_s    # S to R / day
         Recovery from hospitalised                                                            rr_sh    # SH to R / day
         Recovery from critical                                                                rr_sc    # SC to R / day
         Vaccination of healthy susceptible                                                    rv_h     # H to HV / day
         Vaccination of infected non-infectious                                                rv_ni    # NI to NIV / day
         Vaccination of infected pre-symptomatic                                              rv_ps     # PS to PSV / day
         Vaccination of recovered & already immune                                             rv_ir    # IR to IV / day
 Table A3. Fractions of individuals progressing through each severity stage per population group.
              Definition                                                                 Parameter Units
              Fraction of NI that will become PS                                                 fps_ni    #PS/#NI
              Fraction of PS that will become S                                                  fs_ps     #S/#PS
              Fraction of S that will become SH                                                  fsh_s     #SH/#S
              Fraction of SH that will become SC                                                 fsc_sh    #SC/#SH
              Fraction of cared SC that will die into D                                          fd_sc     #D/#SCIC
              Fraction of NI that will recover into R1                     (1- fps_ni)            fr_ni    #IR/#NI
              Fraction of PS that will recover into R1                     (1- fs_ps)            fr_ps     #IR/#PS
              Fraction of S that will recover into R1                      (1- fsh_s)             fr_s     #IR/#S
              Fraction of SH that will recover into R1                     (1- fsc_sh)           fr_sh     #IR/#SH
              Fraction of cared SC that will recover into R1               (1- fd_sc)             fr_sc    #IR/#SCIC
                                          1
                                           Calculated by difference with the complementary, not an input parameter

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
        Table A4. Clinical average times in each infection stage in vectors per population group.
                Definition                                                                     Parameter Units
                Time to become infectious after infection                                          tps_ni    days
                Time to develop symptoms from becoming infectious                                   ts_ps    days
                Time to require hospitalisation from symptoms onset                                 tsh_s    days
                Time to require critical care from hospitalisation                                 tsc_sh    days
                Time to death from critical condition                                               td_sc    days
                Time to death from critical if no care is available                                td_nc     days
                Time to fully recover from presymptomatic non-infectious                            tr_ni    days
                Time to fully recover from presymptomatic infectious                                tr_ps    days
                Time to fully recover from (non-severe) symptoms                                     tr_s    days
                Time to fully recover from hospitalisation                                          tr_sh    days
                Time to fully recover from critical condition                                       tr_sc    days
    The rates of transition between stages (in number of individuals per day) are described in Eqs.
A1.a-e. All rates are vectors per age group of dimensions (1x9). Note that the point operators
between vectors indicate an element-by-element vector operation.
                                  rni_h = ri_ps .+ ri_s                                                                 (Eq. A1.a)
                                  rps_ni = (fps_ni./ tps_ni).* Nni                                                      (Eq. A1.b)
                                  rs_ps = (fs_ps ./ ts_ps) .* Nps                                                       (Eq. A1.c)
                                  rsh_s = (fsh_s ./ tsh_s) .* Ns                                                        (Eq. A1.d)
                                  rsc_sh = (fsc_sh./ tsc_sh).* Nsh                                                      (Eq. A1.e)
    The rates of individuals fully recovering and becoming immune from the different infected
stages (in number of individuals per day) are described in Eqs A2.a-e. (all rates in vectors per age
group).
                                  rr_ni = (fr_ni./ tr_ni) .* Nni                                                        (Eq. A2.a)
                                  rr_ps = (fr_ps./ tr_ps).* Nps                                                         (Eq. A2.b)
                                  rr_s = (fr_s ./ tr_s) .* Ns                                                           (Eq. A2.c)
                                  rr_sh = (fr_sh./ tr_sh).* Nsh                                                         (Eq. A2.d)
                                  rr_sc = (fr_sc./ tr_sc) .* Nsc_ic                                                     (Eq. A2.e)
    The rate of transition from critical to deceased is the sum of that of those in critical condition
receiving intensive care (rd_scic) plus that of those without available care (rd_scnc) as per Eqs. A3.a-c.
All critical individuals not receiving intensive care (Nsc_ncc) are assumed to become fatalities after a
time (td_nc). A description of the critical care model allocation (in case the ICU capacity limits is
reached) is provided below.
                                  rd_sc = rd_scic + rd_scnc                                                             (Eq. A3.a)
  where                           rd_scic = (fd_sc./ td_sc) .* Nsc_ic                                                   (Eq. A3.b)
                                  rd_scnc = ( 1 ./ td_nc) .* Nsc_ncc                                                    (Eq. A3.c)

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
  preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Allocation of critical care capacity if exceeded
The impact of available critical care capacity is modelled by a specific function to allocate critically
ill individuals as per the available ICU. The function allocates critically ill individuals in two possible
groups, namely those admitted to ICU (Nsc_ic) and those not admitted to ICU due to lack of capacity
or for medical or humanitarian reasons (Nsc_ncc). At each simulation time point the allocation
function is computed for the total Nsc per age group.
     The function allocates ICU resources with priority to populations groups with higher ICU survival
rate (fr_sc) until the maximum number of intensive care units is reached leaving any remaining
individuals without care, in this way Nsc_ic and Nsc_ncc are computed.
     As the COVID-19 outbreak has progressed, data indicate that not all patients in critical condition
have been admitted into intensive care units (ICU). Data show that many individuals with very poor
prognosis, particularly those of oldest age may have never been referred to ICU due to capacity
limitations or other medical humanitarian reasons. Data from Spain (Ministerio Sanidad España: Act.
107 COVID-19) show that for individuals over 70, only a fraction of the reported fatalities previously
hospitalised was ever admitted to ICU and this may not be only due to ICU lack of capacity. In order
to maintain consistency with the reported data (Ministerio Sanidad España: Act. 107 COVID-19) the
parameters of fd_sc and fsc_sh have been estimated such that the product of fd_sc * fsc_sh (fatality ratios
over hospitalised individuals) is consistent with reported numbers for all ages irrespective of
reported ICU admissions.
Rates of infection
The infection of healthy susceptible individuals (H and HV) is modelled as occurring only via their
interaction with infectious either pre-symptomatic (PS) or symptomatic (S) individuals. Hospitalised
(SH) and critical (SC) individuals are assumed not available for contacts neither are those deceased
(D). Immune individuals after recovery (IR) or effective vaccination (IV) are also not infectious but
contribute to the interactive pool of individuals towards herd immunity.
     Two rates of infection of healthy susceptible individuals (in number of infections per day) are
defined, one from each one of the two possible infecting groups (PS and S). However, in order to
serve the goal of determining the optimal sequence of vaccination through population groups, the
rates of infection have been expanded into terms for each population group.
     The rate of infection of each (age-related) population group i results from the product of the
number of healthy susceptible (H) individuals in the group (Nhi) times the sum of the rates of
infection from contacts with each one of all the groups. This, for each group, is the product of the
average number of daily contacts with individuals of that group (nihi,j) times the fraction of those in
that group which are infectious (PS or S) times the likelihood of contagion to occur (modelled as
function of the use of protection measures e.g. PPE by individuals in i and j groups) (see Eqs A4.a-b
and Figure A1).
                                  ri_psi = Nhi * j(nihi,j.* fipsj.*pipsi,j)                                             (Eq. A4.a)
                                  ri_si = Nhi * j(nihi,j.* fisj.*pisi,j)                                                (Eq. A4.b)

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
  preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
              Figure A1. Visualisation of the rate of infection of individuals from a group i as per Eq. A4
      For each (age-related) group, the average number of daily contacts an individual in a group i has
with individuals from each one of the groups j (nii,j) are the most important parameters required as
an input as they describe the level of social interactivity. These inputs allow for the description of
specific key activities in a given group as well as for a complete customisation to the specifics of any
community or country. Recent data from contact tracing applications and modelling makes the use
of these information possible and reliable for these parameters (Prem et al., 2020). Examples on
how these parameters reflect interventions is the opening of schools, which would involve high
numbers of daily contacts between children in schools age groups, similarly for secondary school or
universities but not necessarily with the other groups. This mapping of contacts is provided via a
contacts matrix, in which only the part above the diagonal can be provided as direct input while the
part below the diagonal is automatically calculated for consistency between groups based on their
relative population sizes. Table S3b shows an example of values arbitrarily assigned and using the
demographics of Spain 2019 (INE Spain, 2020). Interventions such as the degree of social isolation
as described by Rodríguez et al.(2020) remain possible to simulate by modification of these matrix
of average daily contacts even at a more detailed level since specific values for group-to-group
number of daily contacts can be defined.
      The second term impacting the rate of infection of a group i is, for each j group with which
contacts exist, the proportion of individuals that are infectious (i.e. PS and S) and still interacting (fipsj
and fisj). This can be directly computed at every time step from the dynamic variables (Eq. A5). This
computation incorporates the impact of the awareness of infection after positive testing (Rodríguez
et al., 2020) via a reduction factor of social interaction for those infected-aware (due to positive
testing) or of infected-suspicious individuals. For untested individuals in a group j showing
symptoms (S), a precautionary self or imposed partial quarantine is captured by the parameter (rfisj).
For tested individuals, the awareness of infection after a positive result is assumed to lead to a full
quarantine and removes those individuals from regular interaction with others. The fractions of
infectious PS and S individuals that remain in interaction with others (fips and fis) are calculated as
per Eqs A5.a-b. Hospitalised, critical and deceased are considered excluded from the pool of
interacting individuals.
fipsj = (1–ptpsj *tsns_ps) *N’psj / [N’hj + N’nij + (1–ptpsj* tsns_ps)*N’psj + (1–ptsj*tsns_s)*rfisj * N’sj) + N’irj+ N’ivj] (Eq. A5.a)
fisj = (1–ptsj*tsns_s)*rfisj*N’sj) / [N’hj + N’nij + (1–ptpsj* tsns_ps)*N’psj + (1–ptsj*tsns_s)*rfisj * N’sj) + N’irj+ N’ivj] (Eq. A5.b)
where, N’xj means the sum in stage x of both those not vaccinated and those ineffectively vaccinated
(N’Xj = Nxj + Nxvj) in population group j; ptpsj is the proportion of randomly tested non-symptomatic
individuals and ptsj is the proportion of symptomatic individuals tested. The parameters tsns_ps and
tsns_s refer to the sensitivity of the tests for individuals in PS and S stages respectively. The differences
are justified since e.g. for non-symptomatic individuals, only RT-qPCR tests are typically assumed
adequate while, for symptomatic S individuals, both RT-qPCR and serological tests are used.
      The third term impacting the rate of infection within group i, is the likelihood of infection per
contact with an infectious (PS or S) individual of the group j. This is an element that could be directly

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
provided in the form of matrix of likelihood of infection between groups (pi_ps and pi_s) without
further modelling. If the effect of specific interventions if of interest, the likelihood of infection can
be further modelled in more detail as per below.
    In this example likelihood of infection between groups is presented modelled as per Eq. A6a-b
based on the level of PPE use and awareness displayed by the two interacting parties (Rodríguez et
al., 2020) (see Eqs. A6) together with a newly proposed degree of infectiousness for PS and S. The
parameters infps and infs reflect the degree of infectiousness between 0 and 1. This degree of
infectiousness is considered potentially relevant in view not only on possible differences in viral load
between PS and S individuals but also of ongoing research regarding specific population groups (e.g.
children) which could display different levels of infectiousness to others. The level of protection and
awareness of healthy susceptible individuals in the group i is described by the parameter lpahi as
they interact with infectious PS and S individuals of group j with lpapsj and lpasj respectively. The
values of the parameters can vary between 0 and 1, with 1 corresponding to the use of
comprehensive protective measures and zero to the most careless opposite situation. Different
values are assigned for the different activity and age-related population groups. (e.g. for primary
school children and elderly). In this way, for individuals in group i, the likelihood of infection per
interaction with individuals of the group j (PS and S respectively) is calculated as per Eqs A6.a-b.
                                  pi_psij = (1 – lpahi) * (1 – lpapsj)* infpsj;                                         (Eq. A6.a)
                                  pi_sij = (1 – lpahi) * (1 – lpasj) * infsj ;                                          (Eq. A6.b)
    Table A5 shows the definitions and units of key variables and parameter used in the calculation
of the rate of infection.
          Table A5. Behaviour-related variables and parameters affecting the rate of infection.
  Definition                                                              Parameter                        Units
                                                                                  ij
  Average daily contacts per H group i individual with j                      nih        #contacts j/ H individual i∙day
  Personal protection and awareness by H in group i1                         lpahi                           ∅
  Personal protection and awareness by PS in group j 1                      lpapsj                           ∅
  Personal protection and awareness by S in group j 1                        lpasj                           ∅
  Infectiousness level by PS in group j 1                                    infpsj                          ∅
  Infectiousness level by S in group j 1                                      infsj                          ∅
  Likelihood of infection by H individual i with PS in j 2                   pi_psij         infections / i contacting PS in j
  Likelihood of infection by H individual i with S in j 2                     pi_sij         infections / i contacting PS in j
  Percentage of tested individuals from PS in group j1                       ptpsj       #random (non S) tested/#(H+NI+PS)
  Percentage of tested individuals from S in group j 1                        ptsj                 #random S tested/#S
  Sensitivity of tests used on PS individuals                               tsns_ps             #PS detected / #PS tested
  Sensitivity of tests used on S individuals                                 tsns_s               #S detected / #S tested
  Reduction factor in contacts by S in group j1                               rfisj                          ∅
     1                                            2
      Values only within the interval [0,1]; Calculated if modelled or they can be directly provided as input parameters.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Rate of vaccination
Once an effective vaccination against the SARS-CoV-2 virus becomes available, its mass deployment
will take place, at any given moment, at a specific vaccination rate. This rate will be limited either
by the availability of vaccine doses or by the system’s capacity to deliver them.
    The recipients of the vaccine within the population groups will be all those individuals, either non
tested or having tested (truly or falsely) negative or having recovered, that display no symptoms.
This will include the vaccinations to the target healthy individuals (H) but also to untargeted individuals
such as the non infectious (NI), those unaware (untested or with false negative test) that are pre-
symptomatic infectious (PS) and those that have recovered from the infection (aware or not) (R).
    A total capacity vaccination rate is defined (rvT), in number of individuals that can be vaccinated
per day. The vaccination rates of individuals in each of the four possible stages suitable for
vaccination, are defined as per Eqs A7.a-d in vectors for each (age-related) population group. The
rate is proportional to the individuals in each stage and in each group among those suitable and
called for vaccination.
                                  rv_h = rvT * fv .* Nsv / i (fv .*Nsv)] .* Nh ./ Nsv                                  (Eq. A7.a)
                                  rv_ni = rvT * fv .* Nsv / i (fv .*Nsv)] .* Nni ./ Nsv                                (Eq. A7.b)
                                  rv_ps = rvT * fv .* Nsv / i (fv .*Nsv)] .* N#ps ./ Nsv                               (Eq. A7.c)
                                  rv_ir = rvT * fv .* Nsv / i (fv .*Nsv)] .* Nir ./ Nsv                                (Eq. A7.d)
where fv is a vector of zeros with one only on the groups currently called for vaccination in a specific
moment. N#ps refers to untested PS individuals therefore unaware of their infection and susceptible
of receiving vaccination N#ps = (1-ptps.* tsns_ps).*Nps.
    In a given population group that no distinction is assumed possible between individuals in the
vaccination suitable stages without symptoms. Therefore, in a population group i, the total number
of undistinguishable individuals suitable for vaccination (NSVi) is given by Eq. A7.d.
                                  NSVi = Nhi + Nnii + (1–ptpsj *tsns_ps)*Npsj + Nri                                     (Eq. A7.d)
    With the above definition, the problem of determining the optimum plan for vaccine application
is reduced to the determination, at any given moment in time, of the optimum values of fvi for each
population group, until the vaccination campaign is completed.
Dynamic transition equations
The dynamic variation on the number of unvaccinated individuals in each stage over time in vectors
of (age-related) population groups is governed by the population balance equations Eqs A8.a-g.
                               dNh/dt = – rni_h .*(1-pVh)                                            – rv_h          (Eq. A8.a)
                               dNni/dt = rni_h .*(1-pVh) – (rps_ni + rr_ni) .*(1-pVni)               – rv_ni         (Eq. A8.b)
                               dNps/dt = rps_ni .*(1-pVni) – (rs_ps + rr_ps) .*(1-pVps) – rv_ps                      (Eq. A8.c)
                               dNs/dt = rs_ps .*(1-pVps) – (rsh_s + rr_s) .*(1-pVs)                                  (Eq. A8.d)
                               dNsh/dt = rsh_s .*(1-pVs) – (rsc_sh + rr_sh) .*(1-pVsh)                               (Eq. A8.e)
                               dNsc/dt = rsc_sh .*(1-pVsh) – (rd_sc + rr_sc) .*(1-pVsc)                              (Eq. A8.f)
                               dNir/dt = rr_ni .*(1-pVni) + rr_ps.*(1-pVps) + rr_s .*(1-pVs) +…
                                              rr_sh .*(1-pVsh)+ rr_sc .*(1-pVsc)                     + rv_r          (Eq. A8.g)

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    The vaccines once commercialised will likely display a given effectiveness (eV) per population
group, which will lead to a proportion of ineffective vaccinations. Those ineffectively vaccinated
individuals will not acquire immunity and therefore remain susceptible to infection and to all stages
of severity. These must however be accounted for separately as they should not be vaccinated
again. The population balances for all vaccinated individuals in their possible stages are presented
in Eqs A8.h-n.
                               dNhv/dt = – rni_h .* pVh                                              – rv_h.*(1-eV) (Eq. A8.h)
                               dNniv/dt = rni_h .* pVh – (rps_ni + rr_ni) .* pVni                    – rv_ni         (Eq. A8.i)
                               dNpsv/dt = rps_ni .* pVni – (rs_ps + rr_ps) .* pVps                   – rv_ps         (Eq. A8.j)
                               dNsv/dt = rs_ps .* pVps – (rsh_s + rr_s) .* pVs                                       (Eq. A8.k)
                               dNshv/dt = rsh_s .* pVs – (rsc_sh + rr_sh) .* pVsh                                    (Eq. A8.l)
                               dNscv/dt = rsc_sh .* pVsh – (rd_sc + rr_sc) .* pVsc                                   (Eq. A8.m)
                               dNiv/dt = rr_ni .*pVni + rr_ps.*pVps + rr_s .*pVs +…
                                              rr_sh .*pVsh+ rr_sc .*pVsc                          + rv_r – rv_h.* eV (Eq. A8.n)
    Finally the balance of fatalities is shown in Eq. A8.o.
                               dNd/dt = rd_sc                                                                        (Eq. A8.o)
where pV# is the proportion of individuals in stage # (vector for each population group) that have
received a vaccine dose (effective or not).
Computation of the dynamic reproduction number (R)
The reproduction number describes the potential infections of susceptible individuals from infected
individuals (Delamater et al. 2019). Since the model generates a deterministic set of values for its
outputs at any given time, an instantaneous deterministic computation of the reproduction number
(R) is possible. Multiple parameters and variables influence the R such as the duration of the
infectious stages; the likelihoods of infection per contact as well as the percentages of individuals
transitioning between stages.
    The dynamic reproduction number (R) is computed over time according to Eq. A9 from the
current values of the model state variables. The computation of R assumes that infectious
individuals can only infect others while they are in pre-symptomatic (PS) and symptomatic (S)
stages. Although it has been speculated that post-symptomatic recovered individuals may be
infectious for some period of time, this has not been considered at this time given the insufficient
data. Hospitalised and critical individuals are assumed not able to infect others in the general
population as they are in controlled settings. The provided dynamic output of the reproduction
number R provides additional information that can be used for decision making.
    The computation of the R number is conducted considering that infected individuals can take
only three possible infectious paths, namely: (i) Recovery after a period as pre-symtomatic (PS →
R); (ii) Recovery after periods as presymtomatic and symptomatic (PS → S → R) and (iii)
Hospitalisation after periods as presymtomatic and symptomatic (PS → S → SH). These paths are
made of combinations of four possible infectious stage intervals in which infected individuals spend
time and can infect others at their corresponding infection rate (see Table A6).

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
               Table A6. Possible infectious stages intervals for the R number computation.
                           Fraction of infected               Interval          Total infections per stage interval per
    Infectious
                           passing the interval              duration                       individual infected
     interval
                               (indinterv/indinf)                 (d)                            (infinterv/indinf)
      PS → R           fr_ps                                     tr_ps      (ri_psT/ NpsT)* tr_ps .* fr_ps
      PS → S           (1 – fr_ps)                               ts_ps      (ri_psT/ NpsT)* ts_ps .* (1 – fr_ps)
       S→R             (1 – fr_ps)* fr_s                          tr_s      (ri_sT / NsT) * tr_s .* (1 – fr_ps) .* fr_s
      S → SH           (1 – fr_ps)* (1 – fr_s)                   tsh_s      (ri_sT / NsT) * tsh_s .* (1 – fr_ps) .* (1 – fr_s)
    The dynamic computation of R results from adding the total infection contributions of the four
stage intervals as shown in Eq. A9.
          Rt =  [(ri_psT / NpsT)* (tr_ps .* fr_ps                     + ts_ps .* (1 – fr_ps))        +
                   (ri_sT / NsT) * (tr_s .* (1 – fr_ps).* fr_s + tsh_s .* (1 – fr_ps).*(1 – fr_s)) ]                 (Eq. A9)
in which, the population group weighted average rates of infection by PS and S are given as per Eqs.
A10a-b.
                   ri_psT =  (ri_ps .*N’ps)/N’psT)                    [infPS/indPS∙d]                               (Eq. A10.a)
                   ri_sT =  (ri_s .* N’s) /N’sT)                      [infS/indS∙d]                                 (Eq. A10.b)
where,    N’xj means the sum in stage x of both those unvaccinated and those ineffectively
vaccinated (N’X = Nx + Nxv) for all population groups.
Source code
The Matlab® source code and the Excel files containing all inputs and parameters used are fully
available on demand.
Acknowledgements
Khalifa University (Grant 8474000317 CRPA-2020-SEHA) and the Government of Abu Dhabi for the
funding and infrastructure provided.
References
Bendix A. (2020) A day-by-day breakdown of coronavirus symptoms shows how the disease, COVID-19,
    goes from bad to worse. Business Insider (last accessed 30-3-2020)
    https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-covid19-day-by-day-symptoms-patients-2020-2
Bubar, K.M., Kissler, S.M., Lipsitch, M., Cobey, S., Grad, Y., Larremore, D.B., 2020. Model-informed COVID-
  19 vaccine prioritization strategies by age and serostatus. medRxiv 2020.09.08.20190629.
  https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.08.20190629
Cori A, Ferguson NM, Fraser C & Cauchemez S. A new framework and software to estimate time-varying
  reproduction numbers during epidemics. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2013; 178(9):1505–1512 (
  https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwt133).
Delamater, P. L., Street, E. J., Leslie, T. F., Yang, Y., & Jacobsen, K. H. (2019). Complexity of the Basic
    Reproduction Number (R0). Emerging Infectious Diseases, 25(1), 1-4.
    https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2501.171901.
Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Kern A, Buchanan A, Fabre C, Halliday D, Heath J,Herzog L, Leland RJ, Lemango ET,
  Luna F, McCoy MS, Norheim OF,Ottersen T, Schaefer GO, Tan KC, Wellman CH, Wolff J, Richardson HS. An
  ethical framework for global vaccine allocation. Science, 369(6509):1309-1312

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Field RI, Caplan AL.(2012) Evidence-based decision making for vaccines: the need for an ethical foundation.
  Vaccine. 30(6):1009-1013. DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.053
Gatto, M., Bertuzzo, E., Mari, L., Miccoli, S., Carraro, L., Casagrandi, R., Rinaldo, A., 2020. Spread and
  dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures. PNAS 117,
  10484–10491. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004978117
Giordano, G., Blanchini, F., Bruno, R., Colaneri, P., Filippo, A.D., Matteo, A.D., Colaneri, M., 2020. Modelling
  the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nat Med 1–6.
  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0883-7
Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N.I., Jarvis, C.I., Russell, T.W., Munday, J.D., Kucharski, A.J.,
  Edmunds, W.J., Sun, F., Flasche, S., Quilty, B.J., Davies, N., Liu, Y., Clifford, S., Klepac, P., Jit, M., Diamond,
  C., Gibbs, H., Zandvoort, K. van, Funk, S., Eggo, R.M., 2020. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks
  by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health 8, e488–e496.
  https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7
INE Spain (2020) https://www.ine.es/ (last accessed31/3/2020)
Pollán M. et al. (2020) Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Spain (ENE-COVID): a nationwide, population-based
  seroepidemiological study. Lancet https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31483-5
JHCRC (2020) John Hopkins – Coronavirus Resource Center (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html)
Krammer, F.(2020) SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2798-3
Kissler, S.M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y.H., Lipsitch, M., 2020. Projecting the transmission
  dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science.
  https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb5793
Kucharski, A.J., Russell, T.W., Diamond, C., Liu, Y., Edmunds, J., Funk, S., Eggo, R.M., Sun, F., Jit, M., Munday,
  J.D., Davies, N., Gimma, A., Zandvoort, K. van, Gibbs, H., Hellewell, J., Jarvis, C.I., Clifford, S., Quilty, B.J.,
  Bosse, N.I., Abbott, S., Klepac, P., Flasche, S., 2020. Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-
  19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-
  3099(20)30144-4
Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S., Reich, N.G. and Lessler, J.
    (2020). The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed
    cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal medicine.
Liu, Yangzi; Salwi, Sanjana; Drolet, Brian C. Multivalue ethical framework for fair global allocation of a
  COVID-19 vaccine. J Med Ethics ; 46(8): 499-501, 2020 08.
Matrajt, L., Eaton, J., Leung, T., Brown, E.R., 2020. Vaccine optimization for COVID-19, who to vaccinate
  first? medRxiv 2020.08.14.20175257. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.14.20175257
Mello MM, Silverman RD, Omer SB. Ensuring Uptake of Vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. N Engl J Med 2020;
  383:1296-1299 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp2020926
Ministerio de Sanidad de España. Actualización nº67: enfermedad por SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) 03.04.2020
    https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/ccayes/alertasActual/nCov-
    China/documentos/Actualizacion_74_COVID-19.pdf
Nishiura H, Kobayashi T, Suzuki A, Jung S-Mok, Hayashi K, Kinoshita R, Yang Y, Yuan B, Akhmetzhanov AR,
    Linton NM, Miyama T (2020) Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections
    (COVID-19), International Journal of Infectious Diseases, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.020
Nishiura H, Linton NM, Akhmetzhanov AR. Serial interval of novel coronaviru)s (COVID-19) infections.
  International Journal of Infectious Diseases 2020; 93:284-286 (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.060).
Parker, E.P.K., Shrotri, M. & Kampmann, B. Keeping track of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine pipeline. Nat Rev
  Immunol (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-020-00455-1
Prem K, van Zandvoort K, Klepac P, Eggo RM, Davies NG, Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of
  Infectious Diseases COVID-19 Working Group, Cook AR, Jit M. (2020) Projecting contact matrices in 177
  geographical regions: an update and comparison with empirical data for the COVID-19 era medRxiv
  2020.07.22.20159772

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.20211094.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Rodríguez J., Uratani JM Patón M. and Acuña JM (2020) Modelling the impact of interventions on the
  progress of the COVID-19 outbreak including age segregation. MedRxiv
  https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.04.20053017v3
Roosa, K., Lee, Y., Luo, R., Kirpich, A., Rothenberg, R., Hyman, J.M., Yan, P., Chowell, G., 2020. Real-time
  forecasts of the COVID-19 epidemic in China from February 5th to February 24th, 2020. Infectious Disease
  Modelling 5, 256–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.02.002
Schwartz J.L. (2020). Evaluating and Deploying Covid-19 Vaccines — The Importance of Transparency,
  Scientific Integrity, and Public Trust. NEJM DOI: 10.1056/NEJMp2026393
Wang, X., Peng, H., Shi, B., Jiang, D., Zhang, S., Chen, B., 2019. Optimal vaccination strategy of a constrained
  time-varying SEIR epidemic model. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 67,
  37–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnsns.2018.07.003
Wearing HJ, Rohani P, Keeling MJ (2005) Appropriate Models for the Management of Infectious Diseases.
    PLoS Med 2(7): e174. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020174
WHO (2020a). Access to COVID-19 tools (act) accelerator: A Global Collaboration to Accelerate the
  Development, Production and Equitable Access to New COVID-19 diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines.
  (https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/access-to-covid-19-tools-(act)-accelerator)
WHO 2020b. Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
  Annex to Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19.
  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/public-health-
  criteria-to-adjust-public-health-and-social-measures-in-the-context-of-covid-19).
Wilder, B., Charpignon, M., Killian, J.A., Ou, H.-C., Mate, A., Jabbari, S., Perrault, A., Desai, A.N., Tambe, M.,
  Majumder, M.S., 2020. Modeling between-population variation in COVID-19 dynamics in Hubei,
  Lombardy, and New York City. PNAS. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2010651117
Yu, Z., Liu, J., Wang, X., Zhu, X., Wang, D., Han, G., 2016. Efficient Vaccine Distribution Based on a Hybrid
  Compartmental Model. PLOS ONE 11, e0155416. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0155416
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. (2020) Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-
    19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet published online March 9.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3.
