medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    An Innovative Non-Pharmaceutical Intervention to Mitigate SARS-CoV02
    Spread: Probability Sampling to Identify and Isolate Asymptomatic Cases
    Nathalie E. Williams1,2,*, Xiaozheng Yao3, Ankita Pal4, Xiaolu Qian4, Mansi Rathod4, Chang Xu4, Adrian
    Dobra5
    1
      Department of Sociology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195.
    2
      Jackson School of International Studies, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195.
    3
      College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 24061.
    4
      Master of Science in Data Science , University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195.
    5
      Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195.
    Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, non-pharmaceutical intervention, epidemiology, survey sampling.
                                                                                                                                              1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Abstract
    Studies estimate that a substantial proportion of SARS-CoV-2 transmission occurs through individuals
    who do not exhibit symptoms. Mitigation strategies test only those who are moderately to severely
    symptomatic, excluding the substantial portion of cases that are asymptomatic yet still infectious and
    likely responsible for a large proportion of the virus’ spread (1-8). While isolating asymptomatic cases will
    be necessary to effectively control viral spread, these cases are functionally invisible and there is no
    current method to identify them for isolation. To address this major omission in COVID-19 control, we
    develop a strategy, Sampling-Testing-Quarantine (STQ), for identifying and isolating individuals with
    asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 in order to mitigate the epidemic. STQ uses probability sampling in the
    general population, regardless of symptoms, then isolates the individuals who test positive along with
    their household members who are high probability for asymptomatic infections. To test the potential
    efficacy of STQ, we use an agent-based model, designed to computationally simulate the epidemic in the
    Seattle with infection parameters, like R0 and asymptomatic fraction, derived from population data. Our
    results suggest that STQ can substantially slow and decrease the spread of COVID-19, even in the
    absence of school and work shutdowns. Results also recommend which sampling techniques, frequency
    of implementation, and population subject to isolation are most efficient in reducing spread with limited
    numbers of tests.
    Significance Statement
    A substantial portion of SARS-CoV-2 infections are spread through asymptomatic carriers. Until a vaccine
    is developed, research indicates an urgent need to identify these asymptomatic infections to control
    COVID-19, but there is currently no effective strategy to do so. In this study, we develop such a strategy,
    a procedure called Sampling-Testing-Quarantine (STQ), that combines techniques from survey methods
    for sampling from the general population and testing and isolation techniques from epidemiology. With
    computational simulations, we demonstrate that STQ procedures can dramatically decrease and slow
    COVID-19 spread, even in the absence of widespread work, school, and community lockdowns. We also
    find particular implementation strategies (including sampling techniques, frequencies of implementation,
    and people who are subject to isolation) are most efficient in mitigating spread.
    Main Text
    Introduction
    With over six million confirmed cases, 190,000 deaths, and increasing prevalence in about 11 states at
    the date of this writing, the COVID-19 epidemic in the U.S. is far from controlled. This is despite the many
    symptomatic cases that have been identified, isolated, and treated and despite the near complete shut-
    down of the country, including businesses and schools, for months in Spring 2020. While we wait with
    bated breath for vaccines and treatments, the U.S., and indeed the world, is still in search of effective
    non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs). Without such NPIs, school districts and universities across the
    country are undertaking online classes in the fall and the calls for a return to shutdowns are increasing
    daily. All of these measures have shown to be partially effective, but at great cost to the economy and
    well-being of families. The key questions we seek to address in this study are: can less-disruptive non-
    pharmaceutical interventions substantially mitigate the COVID-19 epidemic and can they mitigate the
    epidemic as much as or more than disruptive interventions like school and work closures?
              Instead of isolating the entire U.S. population for months on end, it would be much less
    financially, physically, and socially costly to isolate only those who are infected and only for the period in
    which they are infectious. The infectious cases that need to be isolated are comprised of symptomatic
    and asymptomatic infections. Individuals with symptomatic infections are already being tested, isolated,
                                                                                                                                       2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    and treated when they present themselves for testing. It is the asymptomatic cases 1, which are
    functionally invisible, that are confounding efforts at epidemic control. Indeed, studies suggest that as
    much as 79% of spread is through asymptomatic carriers and there could be anywhere from 3-40 times
    as many asymptomatic cases as symptomatic (1-8). Yet testing is largely reserved only for symptomatic
    cases. Scholars repeatedly warn that we are flying blind and new strategies are required to address this
    epidemic. Specifically, Li et al. find that “a radical increase in the identification and isolation of currently
    undocumented infections would be needed to fully control SARS-CoV2.” (6)
              Current methods for identifying asymptomatic cases are universal and ongoing testing and
    thorough contact tracing. Universal and on-going testing is not efficient or feasible in the near term.
    Contact tracing has begun in some places, but multiple problems limit the efficacy of this strategy,
    including low contact rates, concerns about privacy and the speed of transmission (9, 10). In addition,
    given the substantial portion of transmission through asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic carriers, contact
    tracing can only be effective with identification of those infections which are currently functionally invisible.
              To directly address these invisible asymptomatic infections, we propose and test the efficacy of
    an innovative procedure to identify and isolate individuals with asymptomatic infections. Our procedure,
    which we call sampling-testing-quarantine (STQ), combines the classic epidemiologic strategies of testing
    and quarantine with sampling strategies from survey methodology. The STQ procedure begins with
    probability sampling of the general population, regardless of symptoms. In this study, we use simple
    random sampling, cluster sampling, and pooled sampling strategies. Once sampled, individuals are
    tested for SARS-CoV-2 and those with positive tests are isolated, regardless of whether they exhibit
    symptoms or not.
              We use an agent-based model (ABM) to test the efficacy of the STQ procedure for mitigating the
    spread of COVID in a computationally simulated population that mirrors that of Seattle Washington. While
    simplified portrayals of real populations, ABMs offer the ability to model the complex systems nature of
    human populations and provide the flexibility to experiment with various interventions on a simulated
    population in a way that would never be possible with real humans. Accordingly, ABMs are state-of-the
    art for testing the comparative efficacy of different intervention scenarios in epidemiology (11-17). They
    have been useful for understanding the spread of Ebola and Influenza (17-20) and to analyze the
    potential efficacy of various social distancing, lockdown, mask wearing and other non-pharmaceutical
    interventions on mitigating COVID-19 (12-14, 16, 21, 22). In particular, the ABM on which this study is
    based has been used to analyze the comparative efficacy of school closures and work from home policies
    on the COVID-19 epidemic in Seattle (23).
              With this study, we examine multiple STQ intervention and non-intervention baseline scenarios.
    The baseline scenarios do not use STQ sampling of the general population and allow us to compare the
    difference in number of cases and dates of the highest number of cases between our STQ intervention
    scenarios and scenarios where no interventions are taken or where only symptomatic cases are isolated.
    Our STQ scenarios include multiple numbers of tests, and different frequencies at which the tests are
    applied. In this way, our results not only demonstrate the concept—that STQ interventions can have a
    substantial influence on mitigating the COVID-19 epidemic in the Seattle area—but also suggest which
    combinations of dates and tests might be most effective.
              We also test a variety of sampling strategies to examine whether more sophisticated sampling
    strategies applied with the same number of tests can improve the efficiency with which STQ mitigates the
    epidemic. We use simple random sampling, where we randomly choose people from the population with
    equal probability. Our second method is cluster sampling, where we first separate people into the
    community clusters in which they live and separate children into the schools they attend and then
    randomly choose approximately the same proportion of people from each community or school cluster.
    Our third method is pooled sampling, where we place people in groups of two and groups of five, test a
    sample that is pooled from everyone in the group in the group, and isolate all people in the group if the
    pooled sample tests positive (i.e. if any one person in the group is infected).
    1
      Hereinafter, for brevity we use the term “asymptomatic” to denote those who are infected with SARS-
    COV-2, are infectious, but are not currently experiencing noticeable symptoms, either because they are
    pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic.
                                                                                                                                       3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
              For a comprehensive assessment, we also examine the mitigation potential of combinations of
    our STQ procedures (which isolate asymptomatic cases) with other less-disruptive non-pharmaceutical
    interventions. These include isolation of symptomatic cases and isolation of household members of
    positive cases.
    Results
    Our results concentrate on the prevalence of symptomatic cases of COVID-19. While our focus in this
    article is to identify the asymptomatic cases that are integral to infection spread, it is the symptomatic
    cases that represent the morbidity and mortality outcomes that are better measures of epidemic severity.
    Demonstration of concept: can STQ mitigate the epidemic?
    We begin with our most basic implementation of the STQ procedure, in order to analyze if it could be
    used to mitigate the severity and speed of COVID-19 spread. This is shown in Figure 1 which presents
    the prevalence and accumulation of symptomatic COVID cases for three baseline scenarios and three
    basic STQ intervention scenarios. Table S1 in the Supplementary Materials gives summary information of
    key outputs for these same six baseline and STQ scenarios.
                                                            [Figure 1 about here.]
              As you can see, the peak height of the entirely unmitigated simulated epidemic (solid black line)
    reaches about 77,000 cases on day 136 of the epidemic. Isolating all symptomatic cases on the day they
    become symptomatic (dashed black line) reduces the peak to about 50,000 cases. This scenario notably
    reflects an ideal case of the status quo in the U.S. and many other countries, where people with
    symptoms are tested and asked to isolate. Isolating the household members of symptomatic individuals
    (dotted black line) further reduces peak prevalence to 26,000 cases. Already, it is clear that household
    members of symptomatic cases are an important pool of asymptomatic infections and isolating just those
    results in a substantial reduction in the epidemic.
              The STQ procedure for identifying and isolating asymptomatic cases also substantially reduces
    the epidemic. Isolating only the asymptomatic cases who were sampled and tested positive reduces the
    peak prevalence to 66,000, isolating their family members to 53,000, and isolating the symptomatic and
    asymptomatic cases and their household members reduces the epidemic to about 18,000 cases at peak
    prevalence, just 24% of the peak of the unmitigated epidemic.
              In addition, as visually shown in Figure 1a and numerically presented in Table S1, isolation of
    symptomatic, asymptomatic individuals, and their household members can delay the peak prevalence. As
    with numbers of cases, the largest delays in peak prevalence occur when household members are
    isolated along with symptomatic and known asymptomatic cases. When all known infected cases and
    their household members are isolated, this delays the peak prevalence by 74 days, almost two months,
    as well as decreasing the peak number of cases by 77% and the cumulative number of cases by 54%.
              These results demonstrate the value of the STQ procedure: that random selection from the
    general population for testing (regardless of symptoms), can identify enough asymptomatic but infectious
    cases to reduce and delay the epidemic. Further, this sampling helps to identify household members of
    infectious cases who are also more likely than others to be infected.
    Improving the efficiency of STQ: number of tests, frequency of application, and sampling
    strategies
    As shown in Figure 2, the number of tests used for the STQ procedure has a major impact on the
    prevalence of COVID-19. With just 10,000 tests used every seven days for the STQ procedure, the peak
    symptomatic prevalence decreases by two thirds, from approximately 77,000 to 25,000 cases, and is
    delayed by 50 days. With 100,000 STQ tests every seven days, peak prevalence further reduces to about
    9,000 cases, and with 200,000 STQ tests to just 342 cases at the peak, which occurs later than 110 days
    later than the no intervention scenarios. Note that these results also include isolation of household
    members who are not tested as well as symptomatic agents. Our results clearly show that increased
                                                                                                                                       4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    numbers of STQ tests and isolation of household members along with symptomatic and asymptomatic
    cases can decrease the peak symptomatic prevalence and cumulative symptomatic cases by over 99%.
    In other words, isolating only the infectious cases that can be found with our STQ procedure and the
    symptomatic cases that present themselves for testing, while allowing normal mobility for the remaining
    population, can dramatically reduce the COVID-19 epidemic.
                                                            [Figure 2 about here.]
              In Figure 3, we examine how best to employ the STQ procedure, by varying the number of tests
    and the frequency with which they are applied. For cases where a select number of tests are available,
    we address the question of whether it is best to use fewer tests more frequently or more tests less
    frequently. Our results suggest the best combination of number/frequency is larger numbers of tests
    employed at lower frequencies, which results in fewer symptomatic infections and a later date of peak
    symptomatic prevalence. This is likely because the initial implementation of all scenarios occurs on the
    same date (day 30 of the epidemic in this case) and larger numbers of tests employed at the initial date
    sets the epidemic onto a slower trajectory. However, it is notable that the outcomes of all four
    combination scenarios were relatively similar.
                                                            [Figure 3 about here.]
              Finally, we developed and tested the comparative efficacy of different sampling procedures for
    choosing the individual who would be tested. We present these results in Figure 4. As you can see,
    simple random sampling performs the worst, with higher peak symptomatic prevalence and cumulative
    symptomatic cases most iterations. Clustering on communities, where the same proportion of each
    community is selected for testing, performs about the same or even slightly worse when tested-positive
    and symptomatic agent and their household members were isolated. Under this full isolation scenario, the
    best sampling procedure where individuals are selected is clustering on schools, where the same
    proportion of each school is selected for testing and it is only children who are tested with STQ
    procedures. This likely occurs because of the lower rate of symptomatic cases in children; among adults
    there are a greater proportion of symptomatic cases and among children there are a greater proportion of
    asymptomatic cases. Thus, if we are searching for asymptomatic cases, it is best to search among
    children. Consequently, the combination of symptomatic cases, largely drawn from adults, and
    asymptomatic cases, entirely drawn from children and their household members through cluster sampling
    on schools, is the most effective individual-based intervention.
                                                            [Figure 4 about here.]
              Our pooled sampling scenarios are also likely effective. For both pooled sampling scenarios, we
    created groups of two people and five people. We used simple random sampling to select pools and each
    pool used a single test. If a pool tested positive (any one person in the pool was infected), then the entire
    pool was isolated, along with their household members. In this way, we use the weakest sampling
    strategy (simple random sampling), but reach two and five times as many people. Pooled sampling with
    2-person pools had similar efficacy to individual sampling that was clustered on schools. However, pooled
    sampling with 5-person pools is the most effective strategy we find, with peak symptomatic prevalence at
    12, a cumulative total of only 871 cases by day 250.
              The model results we present here are ideal case scenarios. These are intended to demonstrate
    the concept, that 1) identifying and isolating asymptomatic cases can substantially mitigate the COVID-19
    epidemic, and 2) that sampling in the general population for testing and isolating untested household
    members are methods to accomplish this. Our ideal scenarios assume that 100% of sampled agents
    agree to be tested, and that all sampled and tested-positive agents will quarantine with complete
    efficacy. It also assumes that all symptomatic agents will get tested and quarantine with complete
    efficacy, which we already know is not the case in the U.S. population.
              If implemented in the U.S. or elsewhere, we can assume that the efficacy of the STQ procedure
    will be less than estimated here, due to lower than 100% response rates, testing inaccuracies, and
                                                                                                                                       5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    incomplete isolation. Indeed, response rates to surveys in the U.S. vary dramatically with the best rates
    achieving about 90% response. The lower efficacy of the STQ procedure under these conditions can be
    simply estimated from our results at hand. For example, if 100,000 tests are used, but the response-
    quarantine-efficacy rate is 50%, then the estimated mitigation of this scenario will be the same as the
    scenario where 50,000 tests are used at a 100% response/quarantine-efficacy rate. In this scenario, we
    still find substantial mitigation of the COVID-19 epidemic.
    Efficiency
    In summarizing the above results, the best STQ strategy for mitigating the greatest number of
    symptomatic cases and deaths is to use the largest number of tests (to cover the full population) on a
    daily basis. Given that this is not currently feasible, for policy relevance we instead calculate the cost
    effectiveness of various STQ strategies in terms of the number of tests required to avert one symptomatic
    case. As shown in Table 1, we use CDC data2 to estimate that one out of every 18 tests result in
    identification of one positive COVID-19 case. From our model results, we then estimate that if the
    household members of symptomatic cases are also isolated (without testing them), a much lower eight
    tests are required to avert each one symptomatic case. Moving to the STQ scenarios, using simple
    random sampling and isolating only the cases that test positive with STQ results in 145 tests required to
    avert one symptomatic case. This decreases to a low of 16 tests to avert one symptomatic case for
    pooled sampling of 5-person pools and seven tests for pooled sampling of 5-person pools if household
    members are also isolated. Notably, the STQ scenario of pooled sampling of 5-person pools is slightly
    more efficient than the current status quo of testing and isolating symptomatic cases. All other STQ
    scenarios are less efficient than the status quo. However, instituting even these less efficient STQ
    scenarios is likely to avert a substantial number of cases (as described above) and could be more cost
    effective than the emergency room visits, long-term care, lost labor, and other economic costs of
    symptomatic cases and deaths. These comparisons are intended to demonstrate the possible efficiency
    of STQ procedures and not to imply that STQ should entirely replace testing of symptomatic individuals.
                                                            [Table 1 about here.]
               As shown in Table 1, isolating household members of infected cases is much more efficient than
    not. We calculated the exact multiplicative effect of household member isolation for each of our scenarios.
    As shown in Table 2, isolating household members of individuals who experience symptoms is estimating
    to avert 2.22 times more symptomatic cases than not isolating them. The multiplicative effect is slightly
    higher for STQ scenarios and highest for cluster sampling on schools, where 3.37 times more
    symptomatic cases are averted by isolating household members.
                                                            [Table 2 about here.]
    Discussion
    The results we present here suggest that our STQ procedure has the potential to substantially reduce and
    delay the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic, as well as reduce the morbidity and mortality tolls. This could
    be accomplished without the disruptions of school, work, and complete shutdowns or it could be
    combined with other non-pharmaceutical interventions (like masks and shutdowns) to create even more
    effective mitigation. The key conclusions from this study are that sampling from the general population
    can be effective for identification and isolation of asymptomatic cases and that isolating household
    members of known infected individuals is an efficient and effective method for further slowing spread
    through asymptomatic cases. In addition, our results suggest strategies to improve the efficiency of the
    STQ procedure for greater mitigation of the epidemic with fewer tests. These include cluster sampling,
    sampling among the child and youth population that has a greater proportion of asymptomatic cases, and
    sampling pools of people instead of individuals. Our goal with this study is to demonstrate the possible
    2
      Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/covidview/index.html, accessed September
    9, 2020.
                                                                                                                                       6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    efficacy of general population sampling, with techniques derived from survey methodology, and initiate
    the search for even more efficient methods to identify the asymptomatic cases that are integral to the
    spread of COVID-19. Those asymptomatic cases have largely been ignored in current strategies for
    epidemic mitigation and, with our results in hand, it is time to change such omissions.
              That said, none of our model outcomes that are shown in this paper should be taken to imply that
    the scenarios we test here will result in the exact number of symptomatic infections in the real population
    of Seattle, or the exact percentage changes in prevalence in any other city. Our ABM, as with all
    computational, mathematical, and statistical models, is a simplified portrayal of the complexity of real
    human populations. Instead, given the sensitivity testing we undertook with a variety of parameters for the
    infectiousness and virology of SARS-CoV-2, our results suggest the general direction of difference
    between two intervention scenarios, or the comparative advantage of one intervention over another.
    Thus, we do not expect that the scenario that uses simple random sampling, 100,000 tests, employed
    every 14 days and isolates symptomatic cases and sampled/positive cases and their household members
    will result in exactly 131,866 fewer symptomatic cases than the no intervention scenario. We do expect
    that this scenario will result in substantially fewer cases than if no interventions are applied and we also
    expect that it will result in fewer cases than the scenario that applies 50,000 tests every seven days.
              We specifically focus on the case of Seattle Washington here as a discrete and relatively
    homogenous population (being entirely urban with high density and urban-reflective mobility patterns)
    with which to undertake this demonstration of the STQ concept. However, our results can also be
    reasonably interpreted to represent the possible mitigation potential of the STQ procedure in other urban
    areas with similar density and mobility patterns. With the demonstration of concept verified, we also argue
    that STQ will likely be effective in other suburban and rural areas or on a country level, but the exact
    magnitude and speed of the mitigation and the most effective sampling strategies might be different in
    those cases. Further modeling will be required to estimate such outcomes.
              Even with our results that demonstrate efficacy of the STQ procedure, it could be reasonably
    argued that randomly choosing people from the population to be tested and then isolating them, their
    untested family members, and the possibly uninfected people in a pooled sample is a draconian policy. At
    the same time, the COVID-19 epidemic has laid bare the altruistic potential of many people around the
    globe who have already been willing to isolate themselves, to great discomfort and difficulty, for the sake
    of others, epitomized by the now trite statement “we’re all in this together”. Thus, we intend for our
    modeled scenarios to be taken as an opportunity to allow for voluntary participation in a likely effective
    program that could substantially decrease the spread, prevalence, and deaths from COVID-19. In
    addition, our ABM models an isolation period of two weeks, which is almost a magnitude of 10 shorter
    than the social distancing and quarantine that many Americans have already voluntarily instituted for
    themselves. Even further, a full implementation of the STQ procedure could include substantial support
    for those participants that are tested and voluntarily isolate themselves and household members,
    including food and goods delivery, nursing and medical care, academic support for children, and paid sick
    leave. The cost of such extensive support would still likely be less than the cost of the current and
    continuing quarantine on the U.S. economy.
              While the cost of the STQ suggested quarantine could be mitigated for individuals and their
    families, we are also aware that an STQ program could be expensive. It would include the cost of
    hundreds of thousands of test kits, sampling statisticians, and nurses/enumerators to undertake the tests.
    However, the initial cost of the partially mitigated COVID-19 epidemic is already in the trillions of dollars in
    the U.S. alone and the economic impact of historic highs in unemployment has only begun to be
    understood. In comparison, the cost of a STQ intervention program could be calculated with reasonable
    simplicity and would in all likelihood have a much smaller long-term price-tag than no such intervention.
              In addition to mitigating the spread of COVID-19 and the economic costs, another benefit of the
    STQ procedure would be much more accurate estimates of the epidemiology of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
    One of the difficulties of current estimates of the infectiousness, symptomatic fraction, prevalence, and
    death rates related to SARS-COV-2, as well as inequalities in all the above, is that they are based on
    data that largely include only the moderately to severely symptomatic people who are tested. In other
    words, current estimates are based on biased samples. Thus, even with the best statistical and
    mathematical minds performing incredible numerical gymnastics, the result is large confidence intervals
    and wide ranges of possible values for each estimate. Alternately, the STQ procedure, based on
                                                                                                                                       7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    probability sampling techniques applied to the general population (which includes people who are
    symptomatic, asymptomatic, and not infected), would provide the best possible unbiased data for
    calculating much improved estimates for COVID-19 spread.
              Throughout the COVID-19 epidemic, there have been concerns that more testing will uncover
    more infections and make the epidemic look worse than if fewer tests are used. However, we show
    exactly the opposite. The STQ procedure that we developed and tested in this study requires many more
    diagnostic tests than are currently being instituted. At the same time, STQ provides a clear procedure for
    turning more tests into better numbers. Our results suggest that when implemented with proper sampling
    techniques, at particular intervals, and paired with two-week quarantines at the individual or household
    level, the more testing that is done, the lower the case numbers will look and the lower they actually will
    be.
    Materials and Methods
    CORVID Agent-Based Model
    The agent-based model (ABM) upon which are study is based, CORVID, was developed by Dennis Chao,
    available at https://github.com/dlchao/corvid and described in detail at (23). The model simulates the
    population of Seattle, WA, with data on population residences, employment, schooling, and mobility from
    the year 2000. The CORVID population of agents are separated into communities, of about 2000 people
    each. School-aged agents attend schools with other agents in their communities. Adult-aged agents work
    at employers with agents from their own and other communities. Agents also interact with others within
    their communities.
              There are two daily time steps: the day-time step where individuals interact with and can be
    infected by agents within their school, employer, or community and the night-time step where agents
    interact with and can be infected by others within their household. Infections occur when two individuals
    interact. The probability that an interaction with an infected agent results in transmission of the infection is
    governed by β, which is 0.168206 for models with R0=2.6, 0.127852 for models with R0=2.0, and 0.22201
    for models with R0=3.4. Results in this paper reflect R0=2.6, a commonly used value at this time, and
    results for a broader range of possible values, R0=2.0 and 3.4 (2, 24-27), are presented in the
    Supplementary Materials.
    STQ Simulations
    We tested six series of STQ interventions. Series A includes no sampling. Scenario A1 has no
    interventions, a completely unmitigated epidemic. A2 isolates all agents who are symptomatic on the day
    they develop symptoms. This is an ideal case of the current status quo in the United States and many
    other countries, where only individuals with symptoms are tested and isolated. A3 isolates symptomatic
    agents and their household members. All isolations are completely effective (no chance of transmission to
    any other agent) and last until the agent is no longer infectious (two weeks in the CORVID model).
             The B series of scenarios uses simple random sampling in the general population, regardless of
    symptoms, to select individual agents for testing. If a selected agent tests positive, they are isolated with
    complete efficacy for two weeks. The C series uses cluster sampling on communities. The same
    proportion of each community is selected for testing. Once the community proportion is calculated,
    individual agents from each community are randomly selected for testing. The D series uses cluster
    sampling on schools. The same proportion of each school is selected for testing, except in cases where
    schools are small, in which case at least one student is selected from each school. Because the D series
    concentrates on schools, only school-aged agents are selected for testing and adults are never selected.
    The E series uses pooled sampling with pools of two people each. All agents are placed into pools of two
    people with others in their community. Pools are randomly sampled from the population for testing. If a
    pool tests positive (i.e. either agent in the pool is infected), then both agents in the pool are subject to
    isolation. The F series uses pooled sampling with pools of five people each. All agents are placed into
    pools of five people with others in their community. Pools are randomly sampled from the population for
    testing. If a pool tests positive (i.e. any one one agent in the pool is infected), then all agents in the pool
    are subject to isolation.
                                                                                                                                       8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
             For all series B-F, we ran three scenarios. The first (B1, C1, etc.) isolates only the agents who are
    sampled with STQ procedures and test positive (“tested-positive” agents). The second (B2, C2, etc.)
    isolates the tested-positive agents and their household members. The third (B3, C3, etc.) isolates the
    tested-positive agents, symptomatic agents, and the household members of both. Details and code for
    the STQ scenarios are available at: https://github.com/CORVID-ABM
    Acknowledgments
    The authors greatly appreciate Dr. Dennis Chao, who created the original CORVID agent-based model
    that we use for this study. We also thank the Department of Sociology at the University of Washington for
    funding to support programming efforts for this study.
    References
    1.        O. Byambasuren et al., Estimating the Extent of True Asymptomatic COVID-19 and Its Potential
              for Community Transmission: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Available at SSRN:
              https://ssrn.com/abstract=3586675 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3586675, (2020).
    2.        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios,"
              (Centers for Disease Control, https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-
              scenarios.html, 2020).
    3.        M. Chinazzi et al., The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus
              (COVID-19) outbreak. Science, eaba9757 (2020).
    4.        C. Heneghan, J. Brassey, T. Jefferson, "COVID-19: What proportion are asymptomatic?,"
              (Center for Evidence-Based Medicine, https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/covid-19-what-proportion-
              are-asymptomatic/, 2020).
    5.        S. G. Krantz, A. S. R. S. Rao, Level of under-reporting including under-diagnosis before the first
              peak of COVID-19 in various countries: Preliminary Retrospective Results Based on Wavelets
              and Deterministic Modeling. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, 1-8 (2020).
    6.        R. Li et al., Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel
              coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science, eabb3221 (2020).
    7.        M. Morris, "Estimating total COVID-19 infected persons in King County, WA,"
              (http://statnet.org/CovidBackCalc/KCReport.html, 2020).
    8.        M. Park, A. R. Cook, J. T. Lim, Y. Sun, B. L. Dickens, A Systematic Review of COVID-19
              Epidemiology Based on Current Evidence. Journal of Clinical Medicine 9, 967 (2020).
    9.        J. Hellewell et al., Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and
              contacts. The Lancet Global Health 8, e488-e496 (2020).
    10.       M. J. Keeling, T. D. Hollingsworth, J. M. Read, Efficacy of contact tracing for the containment of
              the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19). Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health doi:
              10.1136/jech-2020-214051, (2020).
    11.       J. M. Epstein, Modelling to contain pandemics. Nature 460, 687-687 (2009).
    12.       R. Hinch et al., OpenABM-Covid19 - an agent-based model for non-pharmaceutical interventions
              against COVID-19 including contact tracing. medRxiv, 2020.2009.2016.20195925 (2020).
    13.       N. Hoertel et al., A stochastic agent-based model of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in France. Nature
              Medicine 26, 1417-1421 (2020).
    14.       N. Mahdizadeh Gharakhanlou, N. Hooshangi, Spatio-temporal simulation of the novel coronavirus
              (COVID-19) outbreak using the agent-based modeling approach (case study: Urmia, Iran).
              Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 20, 100403 (2020).
    15.       L. Perez, S. Dragicevic, An agent-based approach for modeling dynamics of contagious disease
              spread. International Journal of Health Geographics 8, 50 (2009).
    16.       P. C. L. Silva et al., COVID-ABS: An agent-based model of COVID-19 epidemic to simulate
              health and economic effects of social distancing interventions. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 139,
              110088 (2020).
                                                                                                                                       9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    17.       S. Venkatramanan et al., Using data-driven agent-based models for forecasting emerging
              infectious diseases. Epidemics 22, 43-49 (2018).
    18.       E. Karimi, K. Schmitt, A. Akgunduz, Effect of individual protective behaviors on influenza
              transmission: an agent-based model. Health Care Management Science 18, 318-333 (2015).
    19.       S. Kumar, J. J. Grefenstette, D. Galloway, S. M. Albert, D. S. Burke, Policies to Reduce Influenza
              in the Workplace: Impact Assessments Using an Agent-Based Model. American Journal of Public
              Health 103, 1406-1411 (2013).
    20.       S. Merler et al., Spatiotemporal spread of the 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus disease in Liberia and
              the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions: a computational modelling analysis. The
              Lancet Infectious Diseases 15, 204-211 (2015).
    21.       A. Aleta et al., Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on
              second waves of COVID-19. Nature Human Behaviour 4, 964-971 (2020).
    22.       N. Hoertel et al., Facing the COVID-19 epidemic in NYC: a stochastic agent-based model of
              various intervention strategies. medRxiv : the preprint server for health sciences,
              2020.2004.2023.20076885 (2020).
    23.       D. L. Chao, A. P. Oron, D. Srikrishna, M. Famulare, "Modeling layered non-pharmaceutical
              interventions against SARS-COV-2 in the United States with CORVID," (Preprint available at
              https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.08.20058487v1, 2020).
    24.       Y. Alimohamadi, M. Taghdir, M. Sepandi, Estimate of the Basic Reproduction Number for COVID-
              19: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Journal of Preventive Medicine & Public Health 53,
              151-157 (2020).
    25.       M. Irvine et al., Modeling COVID-19 and Its Impacts on U.S. Immigration and
              Customs Enforcement (ICE) Detention Facilities, 2020. Journal of Urban Health 97, 439-447
              (2020).
    26.       M. Lonergan, J. D. Chalmers, Estimates of the ongoing need for social distancing and control
              measures post-“lockdown” from trajectories of COVID-19 cases and mortality. European
              Respiratory Journal, 2001483 (2020).
    27.       S. M. Moghadas et al., Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the United
              States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 9122-9126 (2020).
                                                                                                                                     10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Figures and Tables
    Figure 1. Efficacy of basic STQ interventions.
                                                                                                                             Figure
    1a shows prevalence of symptomatic infections. Figure 1b shows cumulative number of symptomatic
    infections. STQ scenarios used simple random sampling to select individuals for testing, 50,000 tests
    implemented once every seven days. Random seed used: 17392. See Table S1 for numerical
    presentation of these results.
                                                                                                                                     11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Figure 2. Efficacy of STQ intervention, by number of tests.
                                                                                                                              Figure
    2a shows prevalence of symptomatic infections. Figure 2b shows cumulative number of symptomatic
    infections. All STQ scenarios isolate the sampled-tested positive individuals, symptomatic individuals, and
    the household members of both; all used simple random sampling to select individuals for testing and
    tests were implemented once every seven days. Random seed used: 17392. The full simulated
    population of the Seattle ABM is 563,452. See Table S2 for numerical presentation of these results.
                                                                                                                                     12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Figure 3. Efficacy of STQ interventions, by frequency of testing.
    Figure 3a shows prevalence of symptomatic infections. Figure 3b shows cumulative number of
    symptomatic infections. All STQ scenarios isolate the sampled-tested positive individuals, symptomatic
    individuals, and the household members of both; all used simple random sampling. Random seed used:
    17392. See Table S3 for numerical presentation of these results.
                                                                                                                                     13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Figure 4. Efficacy of STQ interventions, by sampling strategy.
    Figure 4a shows highest daily prevalence of symptomatic infections. Figure 4b shows cumulative number
    of symptomatic infections at day 250. All STQ scenarios use 50,000 tests implemented once every seven
    days. Random seed used: 17392. See Table S4 for numerical presentation of these results.
                                                                                                                                     14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table 1. Estimated number of tests to avert one symptomatic case.
                                                                  Isolate infected        Isolate infected case and
                                                                     case only            all household members
     Isolate symptomatic *                                               18                           8
     STQ- Simple random sampling                                        145                          48
     STQ- Cluster sampling on communities                                82                          29
     STQ- Cluster sampling on schools                                   113                          34
     STQ- Pooled sampling, 2-person pools                                62                          23
     STQ- Pooled sampling, 5-person pools                                17                           7
     * Calculations for isolate symptomatic based on CDC estimates of positive test rates. All other
       calculations based on model results. Details on calculations available in Supplementary Online
       Materials.
     1 All scenarios herein use 50,000 tests, once every seven days.
                                                                                                                                     15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table 2. Multiplicative effect of isolating household members
                                                                  Multiplicative effect on
                                                                    symptomatic cases
     Symptomatic                                                            2.22
     STQ- Simple random sampling                                            3.03
     STQ- Cluster sampling on communities                                   2.76
     STQ- Cluster sampling on schools                                       3.37
     STQ- Pooled sampling, 2-person pools                                   2.72
     STQ- Pooled sampling, 5-person pools                                   2.23
                              Average multiplicative effect                 2.28
     1 Details on calculations available in Supplementary Online Materials.
     2 All scenarios herein use 50,000 tests, once every seven days.
                                                                                                                                     16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Supplementary Information for
    An Innovative Non-Pharmaceutical Intervention to Mitigate SARS-CoV02
    Spread: Probability Sampling to Identify and Isolate Asymptomatic Cases
    Nathalie E. Williams, Xiaozheng Yao, Ankita Pal, Xiaolu Qian, Mansi Rathod, Chang Xu, Adrian Dobra
    Corresponding author: Nathalie E. Williams
    Email: natw@uw.edu
    This PDF file includes:
              Supplementary text
              Figures S1 to S3
              Tables S1 to S4
              SI References
    Supplementary Information Text
    Calculations for Table 5
    Table 5 presents a measure of efficiency of each scenario, specifically the estimated number of tests
    necessary to avert one symptomatic case of SARS-CoV-2. For the non-STQ scenario where only
    symptomatic cases are isolated, an ideal case of the current status quo in the U.S., we calculated this
    using the CDC reported percent of respiratory specimens that test positive for SARS-Cov-2, which is
    equal to 5.5 at the most recent reporting3. If 5.5% of tests (largely taken from symptomatic individuals) are
    positive, then about one out of every 18 tests is positive. For the non-STQ scenario where household
    members are also isolated, we divided the 18 tests by the multiplicative effect of isolating household
    members on the number of symptomatic cases averted that we calculated from our ABM simulations as
    the number of cases averted when household members are isolated, divided by the number of cases
    averted when household members are not isolated.
              For all STQ scenarios, the tests required per symptomatic case averted is calculated with the
    total number of tests used (e.g. 50,000 tests every seven days, starting on day 30 and ending day 250 =
    1,600,000 tests), divided by the number of symptomatic cases averted. The number of symptomatic
    cases averted is calculated by subtracting the cumulative symptomatic cases at day 250 in the STQ
    scenario from that in the baseline/no intervention scenario.
    3
      Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/covidview/index.html, accessed September
    10, 2020.
                                                                                                                                     17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Calculations for Table 6
    Table 6 presents the multiplicative effect of isolating household members of infected cases. We
    calculated this by dividing the number of symptomatic cases averted in the scenario that isolates infected
    cases and household members by the number of symptomatic cases averted in the scenario that isolates
    only infected cases. The number of symptomatic cases averted is calculated by subtracting the
    cumulative symptomatic cases at day 250 in the STQ scenario from that in the baseline/no intervention
    scenario.
    Tabular results to support Figures 1-4 in the main manuscript
    The following tables present numerical results from the same simulations that are shown in Figures 1-4 in
    the main manuscript. These tables include additional information, such as the reductions in the number
    and percent of cases from the non-intervention scenario and the dates of peak prevalence.
                                                            [Table S1 about here.]
                                                            [Table S2 about here.]
                                                            [Table S3 about here.]
                                                            [Table S4 about here.]
    Multiple seed simulations and presentation of results
    For each scenario, we ran 10 simulations. Each simulation was initiated with a different random seed, to
    allow for stochasticity in results even within the same scenario. In all scenarios, outputs from simulations
    with different random seed starts result in the same substantive conclusions, namely that: the STQ
    procedure can be an effective non-pharmaceutical method to substantially mitigate the COVID-19
    epidemic; cluster sampling on schools and pooled sampling are more efficient than simple random
    sampling; a larger number of tests at less frequent intervals are the most efficient; and isolating
    household members, symptomatic agents, and asymptomatic agents is the most efficient strategy.
             As shown in Figure S1, there was between scenarios with different random seed starting points.
    There was very slight variation in the peak prevalence and in the shape of prevalence curves for
    scenarios where the frequency of testing was two and four weeks. The greater variation was in the date
    of peak prevalence.
                                                           [Figure S1 about here.]
    Variations in R0
    There are still many uncertainties in the scientific community around key parameters about SARS-CoV-2
    spread, including our understanding of R0. Studies estimate a wide range of R0, depending on the
    characteristics and location of the study population (1-3). The results presented in our main text use an R 0
    of 2.6. For a full range of possible effects, we also tested all simulations with a low R 0 = 2.0 and a high R0
    = 3.4, a range similar to several other studies and as recommended by the CDC (2, 4, 5). As shown in
    Figures S2 and S3, STQ interventions can substantially mitigate the epidemic for all values R 0. The
    percent of infections mitigated is greater for lower values of R0.
                                                           [Figure S2 about here.]
                                                           [Figure S3 about here.]
                                                                                                                                     18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Fig. S1.
    Variation between scenarios when different random seeds are used. Figures S1a-b scenarios are the
    baseline with no interventions, with S1a presenting symptomatic prevalence and S1b cumulative
    symptomatic cases by day 250. Figures S1c-d show STQ scenarios with 50,000 tests implemented every
    seven days, simple random sampling, and isolation of tested-positive, symptomatic and household
    members of both. S1c presents symptomatic prevalence and S1d cumulative symptomatic infections by
    day 250.
                                                                                                                                     19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Fig. S2.
    Variation between scenarios when different R0 values are used. Figure S2a shows symptomatic
    prevalence scenarios and S2b cumulative symptomatic cases by day 250. Black lines represent the
    baseline, no intervention scenario. Red lines represent an STQ scenario with simple random sampling,
    50,000 tests implemented every seven days, isolation of tested-positive, symptomatic, and household
    members of both, and seed 17392.
                                                                                                                                     20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Fig. S3.
    Variation between different sampling strategies when different when different R 0 values are used. Figure
    S3a shows peak symptomatic prevalence and S3b cumulative symptomatic cases by day 250. All STQ
    scenarios use 50,000 tests implemented every seven days, isolation of tested-positive, symptomatic, and
    household members of both, and seed 17392.
                                                                                                                                     21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table S1. Efficacy of basic STQ interventions. Scenarios here are the same as presented in Figure 1 in
    the main article.
                                                        Symptomatic
                                                                                   Cumulative symptomatic               Date of peak
                                                     prevalence at peak                cases at day 250          symptomatic prevalence
                                                                                                                                      Delay
                                                                 Reduction                      Reduction from                         from
                                                               from baseline                         baseline                       baseline
                                                                                                                   (Date of
                                                 (# cases)      (#/% cases)      (# cases)         (#/% cases)    epidemic)         (# days)
      Baseline, no intervention                                                   228,030
                                                  75,809                                                              131
      Isolate
      symptomatic                                              26,039 / 34%       189,334
                                                  49,770                                          38,696 / 17%        149               18
      Isolate
      symptomatic, and household                               49,322 / 65%       142,194
                                                  26,488                                          85,836 / 38%        177               45
      STQ, isolate
      tested-positive                                          9,246 / 12%        216,980
                                                  66,563                                          11,050 / 5%         138                7
      STQ, isolate
      tested-positive and household                            23,322 / 31%       194,622
                                                  52,487                                          33,408 / 15%        147               16
      STQ, isolate tested-positive,
      symptomatic, and household                               58,126 / 77%       105,643       122,387 / 54%
                                                  17,683                                                              205               74
     1 All values represent the average of 10 model runs, each starting with a different random seed.
     2 All STQ scenarios used simple random sampling, 50,000 tests, every seven days.
                                                                                                                                     22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table S2. Efficacy of STQ interventions, by number of tests used. Scenarios here are the same as those
    presented in Figure 2 in the main article.
                                                        Symptomatic                 Cumulative symptomatic               Date of peak
                                                    prevalence at peak                  cases at day 250           symptomatic prevalence
                                                                                                                                       Delay
                                                              Reduction from                      Reduction from                        from
                                                                  baseline                           baseline        (Date of         baseline
                                                (# cases)       (#/% cases)      (# cases)         (#/% cases)      epidemic)         (# days)
      Baseline, no intervention                  75,809                           228,030                              131
      STQ- Isolate tested-positive, symptomatic, and household:
      10K tests                                  24,734       51,075 / 67%        135,925         92,105 / 40%         181                50
      50K tests                                  17,683       58,126 / 77%        105,643         122,387 / 54%        205                74
      100K tests                                  9,459       66,351 / 88%         53,569         174,461 / 77%        239                108
      200K tests                                   342        75,467 / 99.6%       2,966          225,064 / 99%        241                110
     1  All values represent the average of 10 model runs, each starting with a different random seed.
      2 All STQ scenarios used simple random sampling, tests every seven days.
                                                                                                                                     23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table S3. Efficacy of STQ interventions, by frequency of testing. Scenarios here are the same as those
    presented in Figure 3 in the main article.
                                                        Symptomatic                 Cumulative symptomatic               Date of peak
                                                     prevalence at peak                 cases at day 250           symptomatic prevalence
                                                                                                                                       Delay
                                                                 Reduction                        Reduction from                        from
                                                               from baseline                         baseline        (Date of         baseline
                                                 (# cases)      (#/% cases)      (# cases)         (#/% cases)      epidemic)         (# days)
      Baseline, no intervention                   75,809                          228,030                              131
      STQ- Isolate tested-positive, symptomatic, and household
      10K tests, daily frequency                  16,482       59,327 / 78%       100,467         127,564 / 56%        211               80
      50K tests, 7 day frequency                  17,683       58,126 / 77%       105,643         122,387 / 54%        205               74
      100K tests, 14 day frequency                16,599       59,211 / 78%        96,164         131,866 / 58%        214               83
      200K tests, 28 day frequency                16,743       59,066 / 78%        95,603         132,427/ 58%         211               80
     1  All values represent the average of 10 model runs, each starting with a different random seed.
      2 All STQ scenarios used simple random sampling.
                                                                                                                                     24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    Table S4. Efficacy of STQ interventions, by sampling strategy. Scenarios here are the same as those
    presented in Figure 4 in the main article.
                                                                                                                          Date of peak
                                                        Symptomatic             Cumulative symptomatic cases              symptomatic
                                                    prevalence at peak                      at day 250                     prevalence
                                                                                                                                       Delay
                                                              Reduction from                      Reduction from                        from
                                                                  baseline                            baseline        (Date of        baseline
                                                (# cases)       (#/% cases)      (# cases)          (#/% cases)     epidemic)         (# days)
     Baseline, no intervention                   75,809                           228,030                               131
     STQ- Isolate tested-positive, symptomatic, and household members
     Simple random sampling                      17,683       58,126 / 77%        105,643         122,387 / 54%         205              74
     Cluster sampling
     on communities                              17,394       58,415 / 77%        107,084         120,947 / 53%         190              58
     Cluster sampling
     on schools                                   9,745       66,064 / 87%         52,201         175,829 / 77%         241              110
     Pooled sampling,
     2-person pools                               9,900       65,909 / 87%         57,698         170,332 /75%          236              105
     Pooled sampling,
     5-person pools                                129        75,681 / 99.8%        871           227,159 / 99.6%       78               -54
     * All values represent the average of 10 model runs, each starting with a different random seed.
                                                                                                                                     25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208686.this version posted October 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .
    SI References
    1.        Y. Alimohamadi, M. Taghdir, M. Sepandi, Estimate of the Basic Reproduction Number for COVID-
              19: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Journal of Preventive Medicine & Public Health 53,
              151-157 (2020).
    2.        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios,"
              (Centers for Disease Control, https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-
              scenarios.html, 2020).
    3.        M. Lonergan, J. D. Chalmers, Estimates of the ongoing need for social distancing and control
              measures post-“lockdown” from trajectories of COVID-19 cases and mortality. European
              Respiratory Journal, 2001483 (2020).
    4.        M. Irvine et al., Modeling COVID-19 and Its Impacts on U.S. Immigration and
              Customs Enforcement (ICE) Detention Facilities, 2020. Journal of Urban Health 97, 439-447
              (2020).
    5.        S. M. Moghadas et al., Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the United
              States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 9122-9126 (2020).
                                                                                                                                     26
