medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
    The Florida Pancreas Collaborative Next-Generation Biobank: State-wide Infrastructure
    to Reduce Disparities and Improve Survival for a Racially and Ethnically Diverse Cohort
    of Patients with Pancreatic Cancer
    Running title: Florida Pancreas Collaborative Cancer Disparities Biobank
    Jennifer B. Permuth1,2, Kaleena B. Dezsi1, Shraddha Vyas1, Karla N. Ali1, Toni L. Basinski1, Ovie
    A. Utuama1, Jason W. Denbo2, Jason Klapman2, Aamir Dam2, Estrella Carballido2, DaeWon Kim2,
    Jose M. Pimiento2, Benjamin D. Powers2, Jung W. Choi3, Dung-Tsa Chen4, Jamie K. Teer4,
    Francisca Beato2, Alina Ward5, Elena M. Cortizas6, Suzanne Y. Whisner7, Iverson E. Williams8,
    Andrea N. Riner8, Kenneth Tardif9, Vic Velanovich10, Andreas Karachristos10, Wade G. Douglas11,
    Adrian Legaspi12, Bassan Allan5, Kenneth Meredith13, Manual A. Molina-Vega14, Philip Bao15,
    Jamii St. Julien9, Kevin L. Huguet9, B. Lee Green16, Folakemi T. Odedina17, Nagi B. Kumar1, Vani
    N. Simmons16, Thomas J. George18, Mokenge Malafa2, Pamela Hodul2, Juan P. Arnoletti19, Ziad
    T. Awad20, Debashish Bose21, Kun Jiang22, Barbara A. Centeno22, Clement K. Gwede16, Sarah M.
    Judge23, Andrew R. Judge23, Daniel Jeong3, Mark Bloomston24, Nipun B. Merchant25, Jason B.
    Fleming2, and Jose G. Trevino8 on behalf of the Florida Pancreas Collaborative
    Affiliations:
    1.        Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute,
              Tampa, FL
    2.        Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
              Institute, Tampa, FL.
    3.        Department of Diagnostic Imaging, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute,
              Tampa, FL.
    4.        Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
              Institute, Tampa, FL
    5.        Regional Cancer Center, Fort Myers, FL.
    6.        University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL.
    7.        Cancer Institute, Advent Health Orlando, Orlando, FL.
    8.        Department of Surgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
    9.        Department of Surgery, St. Anthony’s Hospital, St. Petersburg, FL.
    10.       University of South Florida/Tampa General Hospital, Tampa, FL.
    11.       Florida State University College of Medicine, Department of Clinical Scienes, Division of
              Surgery, Tallahassee Memorial Healthcare, Tallahassee, FL.
    12.       Center for Advanced Surgical Oncology at Palmetto General Hospital, Tenet Healthcare
              Palmetto General, Hialeah, FL.
    13.       Sarasota Memorial Hospital, Sarasota, FL.
    14.       Lakeland Regional Health, Lakeland, FL.
    15.       Department of Surgical Oncology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, FL.
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
    16.       Department of Health Outcomes and Behavior, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
              Research Institute, Tampa, FL
    17.       University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
    18.       Department of Medicine; Division of Oncology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
    19.       Surgical Oncology, Advent Health Orlando, Orlando, FL.
    20.       Surgery, University of Florida - Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL.
    21.       Surgical Oncology, University of Florida-Orlando, Orlando, FL.
    22.       Department of Anatomic Pathology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute,
              Tampa, FL.
    23.       Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
    24.       Lee Memorial Hospital, Fort Myers, FL.
    25.       Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
              FL.
    Corresponding Author:
    Jennifer B. Permuth, PhD
    12902 USF Magnolia Dr.
    Tampa, FL 33612
    Jenny.permuth@moffitt.org
    813-745-5744
    Key words: Biorepository, underserved populations, cancer disparities, prospective cohort,
    pancreatic cancer

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
          (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
      The Florida Pancreas Collaborative Next-Generation Biobank: State-wide Infrastructure to Reduce
                    Disparities and Improve Survival for a Racially and Ethnically Diverse Cohort of
                                                         Patients with Pancreatic Cancer
Abstract
Background: Well-annotated, high-quality biorepositories provide a valuable platform to support translational
research and discovery. However, most biorepositories have poor representation of minority groups, limiting the
ability to address cancer health disparities and improve disease outcomes. This report describes the
establishment of the Florida Pancreas Collaborative (FPC), the first state-wide prospective longitudinal cohort
study and biorepository specifically designed to address the higher burden of pancreatic cancer (PaCa) in African
Americans (AA) compared to Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW) and Hispanic/Latinx (H/L).
Methods: We describe rationale for establishing the FPC and provide an overview of key stakeholders; study
eligibility and design; ascertainment and recruitment strategies; and standard operating procedures (SOPs)
developed to collect, process, store, and transfer biospecimens, medical images, and data. We also describe the
customized cloud-based, secure data management platform built to facilitate recruitment, track study-related
workflow, house data, and perform queries. We also present progress to date regarding recruitment and
biobanking.
Results: The FPC consists of multidisciplinary teams from fifteen Florida medical institutions. From March 2019
through August 2020, 350 patients were assessed for study eligibility, 323 met inclusion/exclusion criteria, and
305 (94%) enrolled, including 228 NHW, 30 AA, and 47 H/L, with 94%, 100%, and 94% participation rates,
respectively. A high percentage of participants have donated blood (87%), pancreatic tumor tissue (41%),
computed tomography scans (76%), and baseline questionnaire data (62%).
Conclusions: This biorepository addresses a critical gap in PaCa research with the potential to advance basic,
clinical, population-based, and translational studies intended to minimize disparities, increase quality of life, and
reduce PaCa-related morbidity and mortality.
Impact: This multi-institutional infrastructure can serve as a prototype for development of similar resources
across the country and disease sites.

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Introduction
       Pancreatic cancer (PaCa) is the deadliest solid malignancy in the United States (US), with a five-year
relative survival rate of 10%1. An estimated 57,600 Americans will be diagnosed with PaCa and 47,050 will die
from the disease in 20201. Surgical resection offers the only chance for long-term survival, but only 15-20% of
cases are resectable at diagnosis. Due to the lack of effective strategies for prevention, early detection, and
treatment, PaCa is projected to become the second leading cause of cancer deaths by 20302. Coinciding with
the rise in the number of PaCa diagnoses and deaths is a notable health disparity2-12, with African Americans
(AA)/Blacks having 25-40% and 25-56% higher PaCa incidence and mortality rates, respectively, compared to
Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW) and Hispanic/Latinx (H/L) 3.
       The state of Florida has the third largest population in the US, is home to more than 3.5 million AA13 and 6.1
million H/L14, and is surpassed only by California in lives lost to PaCa each year1. In 2020, 3,570 (7.9%) of the
45,300 cancer-related deaths among Floridians will be due to PaCa and occur mainly in NHW, AA, and H/L15.
Despite these statistics, PaCa health disparities research is limited among Florida’s diverse population. The
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Registry captures cancer statistics for nearly one-third of the
US population3 and reveals higher PaCa incidence and mortality rates for AA adults compared to other groups.
Although Florida is not included in the SEER Registry, we used Florida Cancer Data System (FCDS) Registry
data16 to estimate age-adjusted PaCa incidence and mortality rates for self-reported AA, NHW, and H/L and
found that AA had the highest incidence and mortality rates across genders, mirroring national disparities17. Thus,
strong rationale exists for studying and addressing disparities in Florida’s large and diverse PaCa population
which is representative of the burden across the US.
     Most PaCa disparities research has been descriptive, with inequities unexplained by epidemiologic and
socioeconomic factors. Modifiable PaCa risk factors which can also contribute to poor outcomes include tobacco
exposure, being overweight (body mass index (BMI) >25 kg/m2) or obese (BMI >30 kg/m2), and having a history
of chronic or new onset diabetes18-36. Although early case-control studies37 reported excess PaCa incidence
among AA to be explained by smoking and diabetes in men and high BMI in women, a more recent analysis
showed higher AA PaCa incidence persists after controlling for smoking, diabetes, obesity, and family history38.
Socioeconomic factors, access barriers, and bias also influence PaCa disparities. Compared to NHW, AA are less
likely to: be referred to PaCa specialists, be diagnosed/treated at high-volume hospitals, receive surgery or
chemotherapy, be insured, or have high incomes11,37,39-43. Moreover, structural racism at individual and
institutional levels may be a driver of these racial health inequities44. Since interventions to reduce disparities can
be more successful when the underlying mechanisms are understood45, evaluation of biological factors that
contribute to disparities is critical. Obstacles to the discovery of mechanisms of pancreatic carcinogenesis among
AA include the lack of biospecimens, clinical data, radiologic images, and preclinical models.
   Biorepositories provide a rich platform to study and address cancer health disparities and improve clinical
outcomes. High-quality, well-annotated national46 and institutional47 biorepositories have been developed to better
understand the pathophysiology and biological mechanisms of PaCa and related conditions (chronic pancreatitis
and diabetes46), but addressing health disparities was not a focus in their development and biospecimens from
minority groups are scarce in these resources. Our primary objective was to develop a platform for translational
PaCa disparities studies by building a robust stat e- wide ‘next-generation biobank’ containing viable tissues,
biofluids, images, and clinical, epidemiologic, and laboratory data, with a racial/ethnically diverse cohort of
patients with PaCa and its precursors.
Methods
Assembling a Team of Key Stakeholders
     Participating sites, multidisciplinary expertise, and advisory boards. The Florida Pancreas Collaborative
(FPC) was founded in 2015 by investigators (JBP, MPM, JGT, NBM) from the three main academic cancer
centers in the state of Florida: Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute (Tampa, MCC), the University of
Florida Health Cancer Center/University of Florida (Gainesville, UFG), and the Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center/University of Miami (Miami, UOM)48. Florida Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA)49 inpatient
discharge data was used to identify institutions throughout Florida with the highest numbers of AA, H/L, and NHW

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
          (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
individuals diagnosed and treated for PaCa. We then used internet queries and our professional network to
identify and contact clinicians (primarily surgeons and oncologists) to assess interest in participation in the
collaborative. Requirements for participation included having a dedicated site principal investigator (PI),
institutional support/backing, and willingness to contribute data, biospecimens, and medical images to a common
biorepository using standard operating procedures (SOPs). With infrastructure grant funding from the State of
Florida’s James and Esther King Biomedical Research Program in 2018, the FPC expanded to include twelve
additional institutions (academic and community cancer centers and private hospitals) including (in alphabetical
order): Advent Health Orlando (Orlando, AHO), Jackson Memorial Hospital (Miami, JMH), Lakeland Regional
Health Hollis Cancer Center (Lakeland, LRH), Mount Sinai Medical Center (Miami, MSM), Palmetto General
Hospital (Hialeah, PGH), Regional Cancer Center (Fort Myers, RCC), Saint Anthony’s Hospital/BayCare (St.
Petersburg, STA), Sarasota Memorial Hospital (Sarasota, SMH), Tallahassee Memorial Healthcare (Tallahassee,
TMH), the University of Florida Health (Jacksonville, UFJ), Orlando Health University of Florida Health Cancer
Center (Orlando, UFO), and the University of South Florida/Tampa General Hospital (Tampa, USF). MCC serves
as the lead coordination and management center. A map of participating FPC sites is displayed in Figure 1.
      Our multidisciplinary, cross-institutional team has expertise in disciplines including molecular epidemiology,
surgical oncology, radiology, gastrointestinal endoscopy, medical oncology, radiation oncology, nutrition,
genetics, molecular biology, muscle physiology, behavioral science, pathology, biostatistics, and bioinformatics. A
scientific advisory board advises, oversees, and evaluates research activities related to the study aims and
consists of members from major and regional cancer centers chosen for their research and clinical expertise and
strong regional and national leadership in the areas of Diversity/Health Equity Research, PaCa Treatment,
Nutrition/Cachexia Research, and Tobacco Cessation. Given that recruiting individuals to participate in biobanks
can be challenging47,50, we are working with community partners including MCC’s National Cancer Institute (NCI)-
funded Tampa Bay Community Cancer Network and the Geographic Management of Cancer Health Disparities
Program143, 192, 193, the George Edgecomb Society, and local affiliates of the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network to
expand our community advisory board which includes PaCa survivors and advocates. Community advisors can
be integral to ensuring perspectives and voices of individuals from diverse backgrounds and experiences are
heard and to helping set priorities, improve the ethical nature of research, appropriateness of methods, and
increase recruitment and retention51.
Overview of the Study Population and Design
Study population. To be eligible for participation, an individual of any gender identity must meet the following
eligibility criteria: be at least 18 years of age; self-report as NHW, AA, or H/L; present to the gastrointestinal (GI)
clinic, surgery, or endoscopy at a participating FPC site with a strong clinical suspicion or diagnosis of a
pancreatic tumor based on symptoms, imaging, biopsy, and/or blood-work; have a treatment-naïve pancreatic
tumor at the time of enrollment; be able to understand and voluntarily sign the informed consent; and be willing to
complete study questionnaire(s) and donate medical images and biospecimens at the time of standard of care
procedures after signing the informed consent document. Confirmation of the diagnosis is sought for all cases and
is typically confirmed by pathologic review of tissue specimens obtained through routine diagnostic procedures by
a participating site pathologist. In some circumstances, we will be relying on cancer registry data, the electronic
medical record (EMR), or report on a death certificate. To increase the breadth of cases for inclusion, we allow
enrollment of patients with operable or inoperable exocrine pancreatic tumors (primarily pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas or PDAC), endocrine pancreatic tumors (such as pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNET)),
and patients with pre-malignant cystic lesions known as intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) and
mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN).
Study Design. This three-year research infrastructure grant uses a prospective longitudinal multi-institutional
cohort study design. The project began administratively in May of 2018, and a 10-month run-in period was
essential for infrastructure building. With input from stakeholders, substantive accomplishments during the run-in
period included: meetings with stakeholders to refine the scope of work; development of a study logo, recruitment
materials, and study web-site; finalizing a uniform study protocol, informed consent document, study
questionnaires, and data collection instruments/case report forms (CRF); translation of study materials into
Spanish; obtaining regulatory approval through the single Institutional Review Board (sIRB; Advarra),
development of SOPs for data, medical image, and biospecimen collection, processing, storage, and transfer;
building a customized cloud-based centralized platform for data collection, management, and workflow; and hiring

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
and training staff. The resources collected at each time-point (baseline, 6 months, and 12 months) are
summarized in Table 1.
Ascertainment and Recruitment Strategies. Engagement of the entire clinical research team is critical to
successfully building a biobank. Each participating site has a lead research coordinator who works closely with
the site PI and the program manager at the coordinating site. This coordinator is integrated into each clinic’s
workflow and is responsible for screening daily clinic and procedure logs to identify individuals to approach
regarding participation. To aid in recruitment, we developed a study-specific flyer, informational brochure, and
public-facing web-site (www.floridapancreascollaborative.org) with a members-only portal accessible via secure
sign-in by participating site staff. Additionally, based on data published by our team and others supporting
incentives as motivating factors in increasing study participation52-55, all participants receive compensation (in the
form of gift card(s)) to Amazon or Walmart) as a token of appreciation for their time and effort upon completion of
baseline ($10) and follow-up questionnaires ($5 each).
Overview of Study Workflow and Data Management/Tracking. A customized cloud-based data management/
engagement platform was built in partnership with DatStat, Inc (Seattle, Washington). This platform helps each
site efficiently perform the workflow summarized in Supplementary Figure 1 including assignment of unique
identification (ID) numbers, assessment of eligibility, obtaining informed consent electronically, administering
questionnaires, and tracking biospecimens. Detailed views of the study platform and select components are
displayed in Supplementary Figures 2 and 3. The platform also manages and stores study-related data and
allows queries to be performed. Individual study sites may only access information pertaining to their own study
participants while the coordinating site has regulatory approval to access and analyze data across all sites.
Standard operating procedures (SOPs)
Data collection procedures and instruments
       At each timepoint, the research coordinator records the participant’s height and weight from the medical
chart, measures their waist and hip circumference using standard procedures56, and administers a 3-page health
screen through the DatStat platform (Table 1). The health screen evaluates the presence of conditions prevalent
among patients with PaCa: cancer cachexia, a progressive and debilitating muscle-wasting syndrome
characterized by unintentional weight loss, muscle atrophy, fatigue, and limited tolerance of chemotherapy57,58;
depression and distress59-62; and past and present smoking history18-30 and assesses parameters such as weight
change, dietary intake, symptoms, performance status, and emotional, physical, and practical concerns. The
health screen comprises three instruments: the abridged version of the Patient-Generated Subjective Global
Assessment (aPG-SGA)63, a revised version of the Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS-r), and the
Canadian Problem Checklist64,65 (Supplementary Figure 4). This screening tool helps our providers to better
understand the concerns of participants and automatically ‘flags’ issues via a customized ‘Health Screen’ report.
Our intent is to proactively enhance patient care, outcomes, and experiences through education/counseling and
referral to other professionals (dieticians, physical therapists/rehabilitation, psychiatrists, psychologists, social
workers, speech pathologists) as needed. An example of a Health Screen Report for a hypothetical participant
with probable refractory cachexia, depression, and a current smoking history is depicted in Supplementary
Figure 5. At baseline, performance status is also assessed by the treating provider using Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG) guidelines66.
     Participants complete web-based or teleform questionnaires. As summarized in Table 2, the baseline
questionnaire solicits core demographic, clinical, and epidemiologic data elements including gender identity,
race/ethnicity, presenting systems, age at diagnosis, history of diabetes and other comorbidities, medication use,
alcohol history, family history, physical activity, dietary intake, reproductive history for women, and gender-
affirming interventions67. It also assesses tobacco use and exposure using questions from the NCI-American
Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Cancer Patient Tobacco Use Assessment Task Force68 and the
Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND), a highly recognized tool to quickly identify nicotine
dependence with 10 questions69,70. Based on reports of enhancements in therapeutic efficacy with use of
cannabinoids71, participants are asked about medical marijuana which is widely available in the state of Florida, a
topic important to the funding agency and the Coalition for Medical Marijuana Research and Education. The
baseline questionnaire contains several validated instruments to assess lifestyle factors and domains including
mental health, lifetime stress72, sleep73, nutrition, and quality of life. For example, data regarding dietary intake

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
and physical activity are collected using the Dietary Screener Questionnaire (DSQ) developed by the NCI’s Risk
Factor Assessment Branch and the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ)-Short Form, respectively.
Other instruments include the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-
PAN26, a questionnaire validated in pancreatic diseases74-76 that is administered with core QLQ-30. PAN26
contains 26 items on self-reported symptoms and emotional issues specific to PaCa, with a high score (100%)
indicative of more severe symptoms and lower quality of life. We also measure dispositional optimism using the
Life Orientation Test-Revised (LOT-R) test and systematically evaluate lifetime exposure to acute and chronic
stressors using the online Stress and Adversity Inventory (STRAIN) tool72. A list of all validated instruments used
in the FPC health screen or baseline questionnaire can be found in Supplementary Table 1.
       Data from the health screen and self-administered questionnaires is being supplemented by data abstracted
from the EMR along with data requested from the FCDS. Supplemental data from the EMR is entered manually
into CRFs within the study database by the site research coordinator or by trained staff at the coordinating center.
The CRFs, summarized in Table 2, capture: 1) presenting signs, symptoms, and comorbidities; 2) pre-treatment
work-up details (including anthropometrics and lab values; medical image availability; standardized radiologic
reporting criteria77; staging information; diagnosis and treatment recommendations; and radiologic metrics of body
composition); 3) treatment details (surgery and other modes of chemo-, radiation-, immuno-, hormonal-, or
targeted- therapy (neoadjuvant and/or adjuvant); post-operative course and complications; pathology) and 4)
follow-up information (date of last contact, vital status, overall and progression free survival). For data
management and tracking purposes, blood, tissue, and image collection/ transfer CRFs were also designed.
Biospecimen collection, processing, and storage
     Differences in biospecimen collection, processing, and storage methods can serve as sources of error in
studies of biospecimen discovery, development, and validation, thus SOPs were developed and tested at the
coordinating center and modified as needed to ensure compliance at participating centers. All supplies and
reagents are provided by the coordinating site. To enable long term storage/preservation, digital bar-code labeled
(DBL) cryogenic vials were chosen because of their durability and ability to facilitate accurate data entry and rapid
retrieval. The DBL is not linked to the patient name, medical record number, or other forms of institutional patient
identification. Freezers at the coordinating site have autonomous continuous temperature monitoring and an
alarm system to notify responsible parties of a malfunction. Freezers are on a stable power grid with backup
generators and are above ground level to prevent damage by flooding.
       Blood. Consented participants donate peripheral blood samples at baseline (defined as +/- 30 days of the
diagnosis date) and at the time of follow-up (~6 months and ~12 months after baseline) in conjunction with
routinely-scheduled venipuncture. Using SOPs for blood collection and processing in line with the NCI’s Best
Practices78, four 10 mL tubes of blood (2 red-top, 2 purple-top EDTA) are collected at baseline and two 10 mL
tubes are requested (1 red-top and 1 EDTA) at follow-up visits. The date and time t h e samples are drawn,
processed, and stored, and other details such as the visual assessment of hemolysis are recorded. EDTA tubes
are slowly inverted 8 to 10 times to ensure mixing of the sample and the anti-coagulant liquid inside the tube and
then transferred to the institution’s laboratory for processing 30 minutes to 2 hours after collection. EDTA tubes
are processed first. For samples collected at baseline, 1 mL of whole blood (from each EDTA tube) is aliquoted
into designated cryovials. To process for plasma, the remaining blood is centrifuged at 1300g/RT/10min and
harvested 12 cryovials with 0.5 mL each (Figure 2a). The red-topped tubes are processed for serum after
allowing 30 minutes for clotting. Samples are centrifuged @1300g/RT/10min. At baseline, 1 mL serum is aliquoted
into each of 6 cryovials and 0.5 mL each into 8 cryovials (Figure 2b). For follow-up, cryovial specifics are shown
in Figures 2a and 2b. All samples are stored in cryoboxes at -80°C until transferred to MCC.
       Surgically-resected tissue. At the time of surgical resection, sites collect and process pancreatic tumor
(PT), normal pancreas (NP), and muscle (MU) from the upper right quadrant of the rectus abdominus, adipose-
subcutaneous above rectus muscle (AD-S), adipose-omental/intraperitoneal (AD-O), and sites of metastasis such
as liver (LI). As shown in Figure 2c, a debridement kit containing sterile supplies (gloves, drape, forceps,
scissors, scalpel, and gauze) is provided for use in the pathology gross room. Sites organize supplies with color-
coded cryodots corresponding to each tissue type, including pre-labeled 50 mL conical tubes containing 20mL
RPMI 1640/2% penicillin-streptomycin (p/s), petri dishes, and 2 mL cryovials (Argos Polarsafe Cryogenic Storage
Vials with External Cap), filled with 1 mL of CryoStor CS10 freezing solution (BioLife Solutions, Inc) for all tissue
types except for MU. (MU is not placed into RPMI or CryoStor.) For each tissue type, the time of tissue removal,
time received in pathology suite (for PT & NP only), time placed in media, and time of freezing is recorded. After
tumor resection, the time until tissue immersion into preservative is typically under 30 minutes to minimize
ischemia and degradation.

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
      When the resected pancreatic tumor specimen is removed, the surgeon immediately obtains an en face
section of the pancreatic transection margin for frozen-section and the specimen is transported on wet ice for
gross analysis by a pathologist and/or pathology assistant. The local pathology team determines whether ample
pancreatic tumor tissue is available for diagnosis and cancer staging and whether a portion of the specimen can
be harvested for banking without disrupting the accuracy of the pathology reporting for patient care. The priority
for banking is the central area of the tumor followed by the tumor margin, and a minimum of a 5.0 mm3 tumor
fragment from the epicenter is requested. Upon obtaining a negative margin on the pancreatic edge, we aim to
obtain a “normal” pancreatic biopsy at the reconstructive end. The site priority is (in decreasing order): distant
pancreas, grossly uninvolved pancreas, perilesional uninvolved pancreas (normal tissue adjacent to the tumor, or
surrounding stroma). Non-MU tissue samples are placed in the corresponding conical tube on ice and transferred
to a designated institutional laboratory/processing facility where sterile forceps are used to transfer each tissue
type to the corresponding pre-labeled petri dish along with 3 mL of RPMI with 2% p/s from each sample’s conical
tube. Non-muscle samples (PT, NP, AD-S, AD-O and any metastatic specimens) are minced into 2-3mm3
fragments using sterile forceps and scalpels and 2-6 fragments are transferred to pre-labeled Cryovials preloaded
with 1 mL CryoStor CS10 freezing solution. Cryovials are immediately stored at 4oC for 30 min to allow CryoStor
solution to penetrate the tissue and then placed into a Mr. Frosty Freezing Container (ThermoFisher Scientific)
(4oC) and stored at -80oC overnight. Cryovials are transferred to a liquid nitrogen (LN2) storage unit, vapor phase
or shipped to the coordinating center the next day per SOPs (Figure 2c). Tissue is stored for future applications
and translation research efforts including generation of cell lines, organoids, or xenografts79-83.
      Two main steps are involved in processing MU tissue: flash freezing for future biochemical analysis (step A)
and embedding in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound for future morphological assessment (step B).
Upon incision through the skin and dissection through subcutaneous fat, a 2.0 x 1.0 cm muscle biopsy specimen
is obtained from the upper right quadrant of the rectus abdominis and sharply divided into four fragments,
avoiding cautery burns. Three of the 4 fragments are placed into three pre-labeled cryovials and put in a LN2-
containing dewar (or dry ice/ethanol slurry if liquid nitrogen is not available) and stored in a -80oC freezer for step
A. The fourth fragment (used for step B) is wrapped in gauze pre-moistened with ice-cold PBS, placed in a pre-
labeled conical tube on wet ice, embedded in OCT, frozen in liquid nitrogen-cooled isopentane, cooled in liquid
nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until shipped on dry ice to the UFG site for storage and future analysis by our
team’s muscle physiologists (AJ, SJ).
Endoscopic fine needle aspirate and core biopsies. In September of 2019, we began collection of cystic fluid
and tissue from patients undergoing endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirate (FNA) and fine needle
aspirate biopsies (FNAB) from cystic and solid pancreatic neoplasms, respectively. Initial passes are designated
for diagnostic purposes, and up to three additional passes are collected for research if deemed safe by the
endoscopists. Residual cystic fluid over 2 mL is aliquoted into 4 x 1 ml digital barcode-labeled cryovials with 0.5
mL of sample per cryovial and stored at –80°C. FNAB smears and cell blocks are prepared according to
institutional cytology laboratory standards. The FNAB needle is rinsed in 5–10 mL of balanced salt solution or
other medium. This sample is then centrifuged, and the pellet used to prepare a cell block. The residual
supernatant is saved and stored at -80°C until shipped to MCC.
Repository of CT images. Consistent with the missions of NCI’s Quantitative Imaging Network84 and Cancer
Imaging Archive (TCIA)85, we use best practices for acquisition, de-identification, curation, and secure
transmission/sharing of pancreas-specific radiologic images with focus on CT images. TCIA has SOPs for Digital
Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) images and metadata that are being followed85. Participating
sites provide CT scans at each timepoint from consented participants to Moffitt’s Quantitative Imaging (QI) Team
via CD or electronically to a secure ShareFile or Powershare portal. Instructions for DICOM header re-labeling
and transmission are followed and tracking surveys are completed in DatStat. Upon receipt, the QI Team uploads
the corresponding imaging report and CT scans into MCC’s Healthmyne Research Infrastructure and logs scan
details into an Excel database. Additional metrics are abstracted and entered into a standardized template for
radiologic reporting of PDAC86. Donated images are also being used to perform body composition analyses.
Development of an Integrated and Centralized Virtual Data Repository. A central database linking individual-
level de-identified data to biospecimens and images across various internal and external source systems has
been created and maintained by the investigative team at MCC and is known as the Florida Pancreas
Collaborative Data Repository (FPCDR). Outside of the demilitarized zone (DMZ), the virtual repository integrates
electronic survey data ascertained through DatStat with paper survey data provided through MCC’s Participant

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
        (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Research, Interventions, and Measurement (PRISM) Core, data from the STRAIN72 instrument housed on a
server at the University of California, and cancer registry data from the FCDS (Supplementary Figure 6). The
study web-site and the ShareFile application used to transfer de-identified images and reports is also housed
outside of the DMZ until joined to participant information and stored on the MCC network as part of the image
repository, DatStat database, or other source systems. For example, demographic data is transferred using HL7
to MCC’s Clinical Trails Management System (Oncore), and biospecimen-level annotation is transferred into
LabVantage and includes variables such as the date of collection, tissue of origin, primary site of disease,
histological diagnosis, storage format (i.e. LN2, OCT, -80°C), the number of cryovials vials of each sample in
each storage format (box, row, and vial number) and their location. Reporting and querying functions are currently
being developed to help with generating summary reports and ad hoc queries. In addition to the security in place
through the DatStat platform itself (which include including Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) compliance, 21 CFR Part 11 Compliance, SOC 2 Type 2 Certification, and Privacy Shield certification),
numerous safeguards have been incorporated into the centralized repository to maintain patient confidentiality
and ensure compliance with HIPAA guidelines. Data also undergo quality and post-load checks periodically to
identify incorrect or missing data.
Descriptive Statistics. Frequencies and percentages were generated for categorical variables and means and
standard deviations (SD) were calculated for continuous variables. Distributions of covariates were compared
across racial/ethnic groups using chi-squared tests, fisher’s exact tests, t-tests, and generalized linear models.
Pvalues <0.05 were considered statistically significant. Categorization of the cachexia continuum and depression
were performed using established methodology87,88. All analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS
Institute, Cary, North Carolina).
Results
Enrollment. Recruitment was initiated at MCC in March 2019. As of August 2020, 13 of our 15 FPC sites were
actively recruiting with 2 sites delayed due to finalizing the site agreement (n=1) and institutional obstacles
including turnover of key study staff (n=1). A total of 350 individuals (264 NHW, 32 AA, 53 H/L and 1 unknown
race/ethnicity) were identified and assessed for eligibility to participate. Of 323 individuals deemed to be eligible
(243 NHW, 30 AA, and 50 H/L), 305 enrolled (228 NHW, 30 AA, and 47 H/L), with participation rates of 94%,
100%, and 94%, respectively. Nearly 41% (n=124) of enrolled participants were recruited at sites other than the
three major academic cancer centers in the state (MCC, UFG, and UOM) (Supplementary Figure 7). A detailed
flowchart regarding recruitment outcomes including reasons for exclusion and for declining enrollment is shown in
Figure 3.
Study population characteristics. Select characteristics of the study population are summarized in Table 3.
The average age at diagnosis in our study cohort is 68 years, with AA and H/L having significantly younger ages
at diagnosis than NHW (64 and 63 versus 70 years, respectively, P=0.0001). Most study participants (n=161,
53%) are female, with the highest proportion of females observed among H/L. Preliminary data on education and
income level and health insurance status did not identify significant differences between racial/ethnic groups. The
most common presenting symptoms included weight loss of >5% over the past 6 months (n=115, 40.9%),
abdominal pain (n=100, 49.8%), fatigue (n=98, 34.7%) and jaundice (n=66, 23.3%). Mean BMI was highest
among AA (28 kg/m2) followed by NHW (27 kg/m2) and H/L (25 kg/m2). Almost one-third of the study population
(n=90) reported a personal history of diabetes, with no statistically significant differences between racial/ethnic
groups. Most participants have a confirmed diagnosis of PDAC (n=183, 61.4%), followed by IPMNs and PNET,
each representing 11.7% (n=35) of cases. Seven of the AA cases with confirmed histology (25%) had PNETs,
which is significantly higher than the proportion of PNETs identified in NHW (11.1%) and H/L (6.5%). In a
sensitivity analysis comparing all PDAC and PNET cases, it was observed that PNET cases in the cohort were:
more likely to be diagnosed at a younger age (63 vs. 69 years, P=0.0022); have higher incomes (P=0.0173); and
less likely to have presented with jaundice and >5% weight loss (P=0.0054 and P=0.0267, respectively) (data not
shown). Of the 183 PDAC cases, staging data is available for 99 (60 (32.8%) are stage I/II and 39 (21.3%) are
stage III/IV). Of the 22 PNET cases for which staging data is available, 54.3% are stage I/II and 2.9% are stage
III/IV (P=0.0001). Overall, based primarily on patient reported outcomes in the health screen and baseline
questionnaire, the prevalence of cachexia, depression, former tobacco use, and current tobacco use upon study
enrollment were estimated to be 32.9%, 35.1%, 43.6%, and 12.1% respectively.

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
          (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Exited Participants. Forty-seven participants have been exited or withdrawn from the study thus far. Reasons
include death (n=28), screen failure/found to be ineligible (n=8), withdrawal by the participant (n=6), treated at
another institution (n=3), admission to hospice (n=1), and withdrawal by the physician (n=1). Of those who died,
most (n=25, 89.2%) had PDAC, 2 had chronic cholecystitis, and 1 has an unknown diagnosis. A sensitivity
analysis comparing characteristics of exited participants and those not exited did not reveal any significant
differences in sociodemographic factors; most exited participants had stage III/IV PDAC and have died
(Supplementary Table 2).
Survey completion. Over an 18-month period, 189 baseline surveys have been completed (62% completion
rate). Baseline survey completion was higher for participants with PNET (77.1%) compared to PDAC (56.8%). Of
the 189 participants who have completed the baseline survey, 164 have reached follow-up 1 (6-month visit) and
76 completed that survey (46% completion rate). To increase completion rates, participants receive automated
email and/or phone call reminders from site coordinators to complete the questionnaires.
Computed tomography (CT) scan acquisition. Baseline CT images from 231 participants (178 NHW, 15 AA,
38 H/L) have been uploaded to our central imaging repository (Figure 3). Most scans are ‘CT Abdomen Pelvis’
(n=73, 32%). ‘CT Abdomen’ and ‘CT Thorax Abdomen Pelvis’ account for 26% of these scans (n=60), followed by
‘Pancreas Protocol CT’ scans (n=30, 13%). An additional 26% of CT scans are of different types such as
PET/CT. CT scans from follow-up time points 1 and 2 have been received for 20 and 2 participants, respectively.
Biospecimen collection. As summarized in Figure 3, blood samples have been obtained at baseline for 264
participants (198 NHW, 23 AA, 43 H/L) and at follow-up timepoints 1 and 2 for 77 and 27 participants,
respectively. Tissue samples have been collected from 159 of 175 surgical participants, with 119 matched PT and
NP pairs, 152 AD-O, and 149 MU samples collected. Most pancreatic tumor samples (n=114, 91.9%) were
collected prior to any treatment, while ten samples were collected post-treatment. Of the 159 participants with
available tissue samples, most had a diagnosis of PDAC (52%, n=82) followed by IPMNs (15%, n=24) and
PNETs (12%, n=19).
Discussion
        In this report we describe the establishment of the first state-wide biobank dedicated to minimizing
disparities and personalizing care for individuals affected by PaCa. Throughout this multiple stakeholder-led
initiative, we have proactively developed and implemented robust SOPs to collect, process, and store blood and
tissues uniformly to ensure quality specimens for downstream analyses. Moreover, we developed standardized
methods for the collection of demographic, socioeconomic, clinical, laboratory, and epidemiologic data with which
to annotate the biospecimens. By integrating data with biomarkers derived from biospecimens and medical
images, we hope to investigate biological processes that may underlie disparities and poor outcomes and develop
targeted and personalized interventions that may improve outcomes for individuals. In line with prior studies of
PaCa disparities4,6-11,38,89, the AA cases enrolled in our cohort to date were diagnosed at younger ages (mean=64
years) and have a higher BMI than NHW. In contrast to retrospective reviews of cancer registry data from other
large stated including Texas8 and California10, we are observing a higher proportion of females affected by PaCa
in our cohort, especially among AA and H/L.
It is well documented that recruitment and enrollment of underserved populations into cancer biobanks and
clinical trials is challenging due to multiple factors: lack of trust; concerns surrounding protection of privacy;
language barriers; aversion to additional blood draws; transportation issues; and institutional barriers including
organizational challenges and lack of resources to conduct research90-96. The FPC has worked diligently to
address these barriers through the incorporation of known facilitators, including use of Spanish-translated written
materials, combining study visits and blood draws with standard of care appointments, and enlisting the
promotion of the study by engaged providers trusted by potential participants95,97. To address institutional barriers,
the FPC coordinating center has worked closely with academic and community hospitals to meet with
pathologists, laboratory technicians, regulatory specialists, and business offices to obtain buy-in for the study,
ensure a study coordinator is available for study visits and data entry, and that all study-related supplies
(including iPads) are provided. This institutional support has been essential to ensuring the study is accessible to
populations seen at lower-volume hospitals and/or those hospitals without research infrastructure in place.

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
The 30 AA and 47 H/L individuals recruited to date account for 9.8% and 15.4% of total participants recruited,
respectively, representing percentages higher than those reported in existing pancreas biobanks46,47 and in
existing molecular studies of PaCa and other pancreatic tumors from TCGA and other initiatives98-102. A summary
comparing the unique FPC resource with the PDAC TCGA cohort (referred to as ‘PAAD’)102 underscores how the
FPC is filling important gaps in PaCa disparities research by: including a greater representation of minority groups
and collecting numerous untreated and treated tissue types in addition to pancreas tumor tissue along with CT
scans, blood, and a comprehensive set of clinical, epidemiologic, laboratory, and quality of life data elements
(Supplementary Figure 8). Importantly, compared to other biospecimen donation studies90,103,104, the willingness
of eligible AA and H/L patients to participate has been remarkably high at 100% and 94%, respectively. Thus,
despite what may appear to be relatively small sample sizes to date, the FPC has been experiencing success
enrolling underserved populations at sites selected based on state data49. Therefore, with continued FPC
activities, we expect the numbers of AA and H/L cases to increase further, particularly with the activation of our
two remaining sites which together see a high volume of both AA and H/L patients. Furthermore, we expect to
accelerate enrollment as remote recruitment efforts are increasingly adopted by sites in response to the COVID-
19 pandemic. The FPC recognizes challenges associated with accessing underserved populations throughout the
state who may be pursuing care at lower-volume hospitals and facilities that do not facilitate surgery or
chemotherapy when appropriate. We are actively pursuing opportunities to engage and educate additional
providers that may be able to bridge this gap and ensure appropriate treatment is provided to incident cases.
In terms of immediate plans, we will be working to advance cancer cachexia research using data elements
collected via the study questionnaire and health screen, laboratory values from the EMR, and correlates of cancer
cachexia characterized by quantitative imaging features derived from CT scans (such as metrics of visceral
adiposity, skeletal muscle index, and psoas muscle index) and molecular markers (such as cytokines and
adipokines) measured using serum samples. We will also be performing genotyping for ancestry informative
markers using DNA from blood collected via this study to validate self-reported ancestry. Finally, based on the
promise of pre-clinical models in translational efforts79-83, we also plan to leverage the pancreatic tissue collected
and preserved through this effort for applications such as generation of patient-derived organoids105. Thus, the
biospecimens collected by the FPC will become an enduring resource for the biomedical and disparities research
community.
Investigators in and outside the FPC may request to collaborate and utilize these resources to evaluate new
research hypotheses after a series of analyses are conducted and published by the FPC. A written proposal
would be submitted and reviewed by the FPC Biobank Utilization Committee with decisions made based upon
peer-review of scientific merit, specimen availability, experience of the requesting investigator(s), and resource
adequacy to conduct proposed methods. Samples and/or data are released upon committee approval once the
requestors secure regulatory approvals, conflicts of interest disclosures are reviewed, and data use and material
transfer agreements are established. Intellectual property issues would be agreed upon in advance with results
from the new research findings incorporated into the biobank. In this manner, the FPC data repository continues
to evolve, generating new correlations and opportunities to evaluate hypotheses.
In summary, multidisciplinary, multi-institutional collaborations in partnership with community stakeholders will be
key to successfully addressing PaCa disparities. Importantly, Boyd and colleagues44 suggest that closing the gap
in racial health outcomes will also necessitate ‘identifying, confronting, and abolishing racism as an American
tradition and root of inequity.’ Taken together, it is critical that community and institutional leaders and other
stakeholders support and enable these important cancer disparities initiatives. It is our intent that the
infrastructure-building described here can serve as a model for other teams who wish to develop similar
resources applicable to their disease sites.
Acknowledgements
We thank our participants and Community Advisory Board Members Lorriel S. Blaise and the late Suzy Swenson
for their support and dedication to this project. We also thank the following FPC team members for their
collaboration and contributions to generating original data and/or data abstraction and entry: Lidia Sanchez,
Jennifer Mull, Yohan Zuniga, Ma Therea De Leon, Lisa Rivero, Rebecca Delph, Brittney Johnson, Yvonne
Zuniga, Kim Lacy, Jon-Michael Eckert, Khattiya Chharath, Beth Montera, Thanh Tran, Alexandra Tassielli, Tri
Huynh, and Thinzar Zaw. The research in this publication was supported in part by the James and Esther King

     medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Biomedical Research Program, Florida Department of Health (Grant #8JK02; awarded to JPB and JGT), and the
Tissue Core, Quantitative Imaging Core, the Participant Research, Interventions, and Measurement (PRISM)
Core, the Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource, and the Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Core at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, an NCI designated Comprehensive Cancer Center
(P30-CA076292). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the sponsors or the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute. The authors also wish to
thank Warren Gloria, Karen Coley, Rithi Somesh Shivaram, Dennis Hall, and Vyacheslav Petrovsky for their
assistance with pathological review of tissues in the gross room.
Figures & Legends
Figure 1. Florida Pancreas Collaborative Study Sites.
Figure 2. Blood and Tissue Collection and Processing Workflow.
a) Purple-topped EDTA tubes are processed and stored at Baseline and Follow-up time-points into whole blood
(Baseline) and plasma (Baseline and Follow-up). b) Red-topped tubes are processed and stored at Baseline and
Follow-up timepoints into serum. c) During the surgical procedure, a debridement kit containing sterile supplies
(gloves, gauze, scissors, forceps, scalpel, and drape) is open in preparation for receiving tissue samples.
Collected tissue samples are placed in labelled conical tubes on ice with 20mL RPMI 1640/2% penicillin-
streptomycin (Pancreatic Tumor (PT), Normal Pancreas (NP), Adipose – omental (AD-O), Adipose –
subcutaneous (AD-S), and Liver (LI), or in an empty conical tube Muscle (MU). Samples are then transferred to
labelled petri dishes for mincing. Non-muscle tissues are placed in cryovials with CryoStor CS10 to slow freeze in
a Mr. Frosty overnight prior to long-term storage in liquid nitrogen. Muscle tissues are either placed in cryovials
with no media and snap frozen prior to long-term storage in a -80oC freezer (Step A) or frozen in isopentane,
embedded in OCT, and stored in a cassette in a -80oC freezer until shipment and future analysis (Step B).
Figure 3. Summary of Recruitment, Survey Data, Image, and Biospecimen Collection Efforts to Date, by
Race/Ethnicity.
The flow diagram depicts the number of individuals eligible and ineligible for the study, as well as number of
consented participants who have donated biospecimens, computed tomography (CT) images, and completed
surveys. Abbreviations: Non-Hispanic White (NHW), African American (AA), Hispanic/Latinx (H/L), Pancreatic
Tumor (PT), Normal Pancreas (NP), Adipose – omental (AD-O), Adipose – subcutaneous (AD-S), Muscle (MU),
Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC), Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm (IPMN), Mucinous Cystic
Neoplasm (MCN), Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumor (PNET).
Supplementary Figure 1. Workflow of Main Study-related Tasks Accomplished with the Assistance of our
Online Data Management/Engagement Platform.
Workflow includes screening patients to recruit, registering their demographic information and language
preference (English or Spanish), automatic assignment of a unique identification number (ID) which is distinct
from their medical record numbers and has a three-letter site prefix followed by four numbers (i.e. MCC-1234),
recording approach outcomes, assessment of eligibility, obtaining informed consent electronically or documenting
paper consent, verification of contact information for the participant and at least one individual who can be
contacted if the participant cannot be reached, tracking of the collection, processing, transfer, and storage of
biospecimens and images, sending automated email notifications related to study tasks, administration of
questionnaires/surveys, and report generation. Abbreviations: EMR=electronic medical record; PHI=protected
health information; E=electronic; CRF=case report form.
Supplementary Figure 2. Workflow and Modules Represented in the Electronic-Consent (e-consent)
Process.
The E-Consent Process has an array of components that allow for more efficient recruitment. This process is
deconstructed into multiple modules: a) Add Participant Form, b) Eligibility Form, c) Approach Attempts, d) Name
and Contact Information Form, and e) an informed consent form (ICF). Upon first screening a patient, the site
coordinator completes the Add Participant form thereby collecting non-protected health information (PHI). Upon
completion of that module, the coordinator is automatically directed to the Eligibility Form which then assesses

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
        (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
the patient’s eligibility through a series of questions. If eligible, the coordinator then chooses the next module
depending on the outcome of the approach. If the patient agrees to consent, a Contact Information Module
automatically populates and directly feeds all PHI into the E-Consent. Within the E-Consent, the patient
electronically signs all portions of the document, including permission to contact a relative of their choosing if they
cannot be reached during their study involvement. On the other hand, if the patient defers or declines, the
coordinator is prompted to the Approach Attempts Module and Exit Module, respectively, where specific reasons
for can be documented and pulled for future encounters.
Supplementary Figure 3. Examples of Data Management and Tracking Screens
The online data management platform includes customized views of all modules. Under the “Participant
Management” tab, the study team can obtain a summary of all individuals that have been approached, consented,
and/or exited along with key demographic fields in a convenient table format. This table format allows for a
personalized snapshot of all participants dependent on what is being assessed by the coordinator. For instance,
in this example the participants are arranged chronologically by consent dates, with the most recent consent
appearing at the top. Each participant can then be seen individually in varying “profile” views. The first icon allows
the coordinator quick access to edit all participant information including contact and study information (as seen in
red). The second icon prompts for a unique profile view depicting all study information, form submit dates, as well
as a table of Study Tasks (as seen in purple). The “Study Tasks” table allows the coordinator to quickly assess
both module completion for data entry as well as biospecimen tracking at multiple timepoints. Finally, the
coordinator can view all modules/case report forms in the “Study Workflow” view (as seen in green).
Supplementary Figure 4. Florida Pancreas Collaborative Health Screen Instrument.
This instrument comprises a) the abridged version of the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (aPG-
SGA), b) a revised version of the Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS-r), and c) the Canadian
Problem Checklist.
Supplementary Figure 5. Example of a Health Screen Report Obtained at Baseline.
Supplementary Figure 6. Florida Pancreas Collaborative Data Repository (FPCDR) Infrastructure.
Supplementary Figure 7. Total number of participants enrolled in the Florida Pancreas Collaborative, by
study site and race/ethnicity. Note: These numbers reflect enrollment through August 31, 2020.
Supplementary Figure 8. Resources Ascertained through the Florida Pancreas Collaborative (FPC) versus
the Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PAAD) Cohort included in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
Pan-Cancer Analyses. This comparison reveals that the FPC: a) includes participants recruited from the
community and has a higher proportion of underserved minority populations , b) collects tissue types (untreated
and treated) in addition to pancreas tumors and normal pancreas, and has c) correlative blood, d) CT scans, and
e) well-annotated data corresponding to each participant. Note: The PAAD cohort being referred to was published
by Liu et al 2018 (Cell 173, 400-416).
References
1.       American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2020. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 2020.
2.       Rahib, L. et al. Projecting cancer incidence and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
         and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res 74, 2913-21 (2014).
3.       Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, Miller D, Bishop K, Altekruse SF, Kosary CL, Yu M, Ruhl J,
         Tatalovich Z, Mariotto A, Lewis DR, Chen HS, Feuer EJ, Cronin KA (eds). SEER Cancer Statistics
         Review, 1975-2013, National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD, http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/,
         based on November 2015 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER web site, April 2016.
4.       Abraham, A. et al. Disparities in pancreas cancer care. Ann Surg Oncol 20, 2078-87 (2013).
5.       Chang, K.J., Parasher, G., Christie, C., Largent, J. & Anton-Culver, H. Risk of pancreatic adenocarcinoma:
         disparity between African Americans and other race/ethnic groups. Cancer 103, 349-57 (2005).

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
6.      Riall, T.S., Townsend, C.M., Jr., Kuo, Y.F., Freeman, J.L. & Goodwin, J.S. Dissecting racial disparities in
        the treatment of patients with locoregional pancreatic cancer: a 2-step process. Cancer 116, 930-9 (2010).
7.      Singal, V., Singal, A.K. & Kuo, Y.F. Racial disparities in treatment for pancreatic cancer and impact on
        survival: a population-based analysis. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 138, 715-22 (2012).
8.      Wray, C.J., Castro-Echeverry, E., Silberfein, E.J., Ko, T.C. & Kao, L.S. A multi-institutional study of
        pancreatic cancer in Harris County, Texas: race predicts treatment and survival. Ann Surg Oncol 19,
        2776-81 (2012).
9.      Murphy, M.M. et al. Pancreatic resection: a key component to reducing racial disparities in pancreatic
        adenocarcinoma. Cancer 115, 3979-90 (2009).
10.     Zell, J.A., Rhee, J.M., Ziogas, A., Lipkin, S.M. & Anton-Culver, H. Race, socioeconomic status, treatment,
        and survival time among pancreatic cancer cases in California. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16,
        546-52 (2007).
11.     Murphy, M.M. et al. Racial differences in cancer specialist consultation, treatment, and outcomes for
        locoregional pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 16, 2968-77 (2009).
12.     DeSantis, C.E. et al. Cancer statistics for African Americans, 2016: Progress and opportunities in reducing
        racial disparities. CA Cancer J Clin 66, 290-308 (2016).
13.     American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures for African Americans 2013-2014. Atlanta:
        American Cancer Society, 2013.
14.     American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures for Hispanics/Latinos 2012-2014. Atlanta: American
        Cancer Society, 2012.
15.     Ahlgren, J.D. Epidemiology and risk factors in pancreatic cancer. Semin Oncol 23, 241-50 (1996).
16.     (http://fcds.med.miami.edu/), F.C.D.S.
17.     Permuth, J.B. et al. Racial and ethnic disparities in a state-wide registry of patients with pancreatic cancer
        and an exploratory investigation of cancer cachexia as a contributor to observed inequities. Cancer Med 8,
        3314-3324 (2019).
18.     Maisonneuve, P. & Lowenfels, A.B. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer: a summary review of meta-
        analytical studies. Int J Epidemiol 44, 186-98 (2015).
19.     Iodice, S., Gandini, S., Maisonneuve, P. & Lowenfels, A.B. Tobacco and the risk of pancreatic cancer: a
        review and meta-analysis. Langenbecks Arch Surg 393, 535-45 (2008).
20.     Ansary-Moghaddam, A. et al. The effect of modifiable risk factors on pancreatic cancer mortality in
        populations of the Asia-Pacific region. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 15, 2435-40 (2006).
21.     Katanoda, K. et al. Population attributable fraction of mortality associated with tobacco smoking in Japan:
        a pooled analysis of three large-scale cohort studies. J Epidemiol 18, 251-64 (2008).
22.     Lynch, S.M. et al. Cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pancreatic cancer
        cohort consortium. Am J Epidemiol 170, 403-13 (2009).
23.     Matsuo, K. et al. Cigarette smoking and pancreas cancer risk: an evaluation based on a systematic review
        of epidemiologic evidence in the Japanese population. Jpn J Clin Oncol 41, 1292-302 (2011).
24.     Bosetti, C. et al. Cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: an analysis from the International Pancreatic
        Cancer Case-Control Consortium (Panc4). Ann Oncol 23, 1880-8 (2012).
25.     Zou, L. et al. Non-linear dose-response relationship between cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer
        risk: evidence from a meta-analysis of 42 observational studies. Eur J Cancer 50, 193-203 (2014).
26.     Ross, K.C. et al. Racial differences in the relationship between rate of nicotine metabolism and nicotine
        intake from cigarette smoking. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 148, 1-7 (2016).
27.     Barreiro, E. Role of Protein Carbonylation in Skeletal Muscle Mass Loss Associated with Chronic
        Conditions. Proteomes 4(2016).
28.     Puig-Vilanova, E. et al. Oxidative stress, redox signaling pathways, and autophagy in cachectic muscles of
        male patients with advanced COPD and lung cancer. Free Radic Biol Med 79, 91-108 (2015).
29.     Rom, O. & Reznick, A.Z. The role of E3 ubiquitin-ligases MuRF-1 and MAFbx in loss of skeletal muscle
        mass. Free Radic Biol Med 98, 218-30 (2016).
30.     Rom, O., Kaisari, S., Aizenbud, D. & Reznick, A.Z. Identification of possible cigarette smoke constituents
        responsible for muscle catabolism. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 33, 199-208 (2012).
31.     Marmot, M. et al. Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective.
        (2007).
32.     Yuan, C. et al. Prediagnostic body mass index and pancreatic cancer survival. J Clin Oncol 31, 4229-34
        (2013).

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
33.     Coughlin, S.S., Calle, E.E., Patel, A.V. & Thun, M.J. Predictors of pancreatic cancer mortality among a
        large cohort of United States adults. Cancer Causes Control 11, 915-23 (2000).
34.     Bracci, P.M. Obesity and pancreatic cancer: overview of epidemiologic evidence and biologic
        mechanisms. Mol Carcinog 51, 53-63 (2012).
35.     Yeo, T.P. Demographics, epidemiology, and inheritance of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Semin
        Oncol 42, 8-18 (2015).
36.     Chari, S.T. et al. Probability of pancreatic cancer following diabetes: a population-based study.
        Gastroenterology 129, 504-11 (2005).
37.     Silverman, D.T. et al. Why do Black Americans have a higher risk of pancreatic cancer than White
        Americans? Epidemiology 14, 45-54 (2003).
38.     Arnold, L.D. et al. Are racial disparities in pancreatic cancer explained by smoking and
        overweight/obesity? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 18, 2397-405 (2009).
39.     Wong, S., Gu, N., Banerjee, M., Birkmeyer, J. & Birkmeyer, N. The impact of socioeconomic status on
        cancer care and survival. in ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings Vol. 29 6004 (2011).
40.     Sosa, J.A. et al. Importance of hospital volume in the overall management of pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg
        228, 429-38 (1998).
41.     Meguid, R.A., Ahuja, N. & Chang, D.C. What constitutes a "high-volume" hospital for pancreatic
        resection? J Am Coll Surg 206, 622 e1-9 (2008).
42.     Gibney, E.M., Doshi, M.D., Hartmann, E.L., Parikh, C.R. & Garg, A.X. Health insurance status of US living
        kidney donors. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 5, 912-6 (2010).
43.     Noel, M. & Fiscella, K. Disparities in Pancreatic Cancer Treatment and Outcomes. Health Equity 3, 532-
        540 (2019).
44.     Boyd, R., Lindo EG, Weeks LD, McLemore MR. On Racism: A New Standard For Publishing On Racial
        Health Inequities, Health Affairs Blog, July 2, 2020. DOI: 10.1377/hblog20200630.939347.
45.     Halpern, M.T. Cancer disparities research: it is time to come of age. Cancer 121, 1158-9 (2015).
46.     Yadav, D. et al. PROspective Evaluation of Chronic Pancreatitis for EpidEmiologic and Translational
        StuDies: Rationale and Study Design for PROCEED From the Consortium for the Study of Chronic
        Pancreatitis, Diabetes, and Pancreatic Cancer. Pancreas 47, 1229-1238 (2018).
47.     Hwang, R.F. et al. Development of an integrated biospecimen bank and multidisciplinary clinical database
        for pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 15, 1356-66 (2008).
48.     Permuth, J.B., Trevino, J., Merchant, N. & Malafa, M. Partnering to advance early detection and
        prevention efforts for pancreatic cancer: the Florida Pancreas Collaborative. Future Oncol 12, 997-1000
        (2016).
49.    Agency for Health Care Administration. Available at http://www.fchc.state.fl.us and
        http://ahca.myflorida.com. Accessed August 2016.
50.     Demeure, M.J. et al. Multi-institutional tumor banking: lessons learned from a pancreatic cancer
        biospecimen repository. Pancreas 39, 949-54 (2010).
51.     Wright, D., Corner, J., Hopkinson, J. & Foster, C. Listening to the views of people affected by cancer
        about cancer research: an example of participatory research in setting the cancer research agenda.
        Health Expect 9, 3-12 (2006).
52.     Permuth-Wey, J. & Borenstein, A.R. Financial Remuneration for Clinical and Behavioral Research
        Participation: Ethical and Practical Considerations. Ann Epidemiol (2009).
53.     Lang, R. et al. African American participation in health-related research studies: indicators for effective
        recruitment. J Public Health Manag Pract 19, 110-8 (2013).
54.     Perez, D.F., Nie, J.X., Ardern, C.I., Radhu, N. & Ritvo, P. Impact of participant incentives and direct and
        snowball sampling on survey response rate in an ethnically diverse community: results from a pilot study
        of physical activity and the built environment. J Immigr Minor Health 15, 207-14 (2013).
55.     Schnieders, T., Danner, D.D., McGuire, C., Reynolds, F. & Abner, E. Incentives and barriers to research
        participation and brain donation among African Americans. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 28, 485-90
        (2013).
56.     Nishida, C., Ko, G.T. & Kumanyika, S. Body fat distribution and noncommunicable diseases in
        populations: overview of the 2008 WHO Expert Consultation on Waist Circumference and Waist-Hip Ratio.
        Eur J Clin Nutr 64, 2-5 (2010).
57.     Yoshida, T. & Delafontaine, P. Mechanisms of Cachexia in Chronic Disease States. Am J Med Sci 350,
        250-6 (2015).

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
58.     Argiles, J.M., Busquets, S., Stemmler, B. & Lopez-Soriano, F.J. Cancer cachexia: understanding the
        molecular basis. Nat Rev Cancer 14, 754-62 (2014).
59.     Barnes, A.F., Yeo, T.P., Leiby, B., Kay, A. & Winter, J.M. Pancreatic Cancer-Associated Depression: A
        Case Report and Review of the Literature. Pancreas 47, 1065-1077 (2018).
60.     Janda, M. et al. Anxiety, depression and quality of life in people with pancreatic cancer and their carers.
        Pancreatology 17, 321-327 (2017).
61.     Kenner, B.J. Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer: The Role of Depression and Anxiety as a Precursor for
        Disease. Pancreas 47, 363-367 (2018).
62.     Parker, G. & Brotchie, H. Pancreatic Cancer and Depression: A Narrative Review. J Nerv Ment Dis 205,
        487-490 (2017).
63.     Martin, L. et al. Prognostic factors in patients with advanced cancer: use of the patient-generated
        subjective global assessment in survival prediction. J Clin Oncol 28, 4376-83 (2010).
64.     Howell, D., Hack, T.F., Green, E. & Fitch, M. Cancer distress screening data: translating knowledge into
        clinical action for a quality response. Palliat Support Care 12, 39-51 (2014).
65.     Cancer Journey Portfolio. (2012). Screening for Distress, the 6th Vital Sign: A Guide to Imple-menting
        Best Practices in Person-Centred Care. Available at: www.cancerview.ca.
66.     Roila, F. et al. Intra and interobserver variability in cancer patients' performance status assessed
        according to Karnofsky and ECOG scales. Ann Oncol 2, 437-9 (1991).
67.     Jones, N.C. et al. Inclusion of transgender and gender diverse health data in cancer biorepositories.
        Contemp Clin Trials Commun 19, 100597 (2020).
68.     Land, S.R. et al. Research Priorities, Measures, and Recommendations for Assessment of Tobacco Use
        in Clinical Cancer Research. Clin Cancer Res 22, 1907-13 (2016).
69.     Payne, T.J., Smith, P.O., McCracken, L.M., McSherry, W.C. & Antony, M.M. Assessing nicotine
        dependence: a comparison of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire (FTQ) with the Fagerstrom Test
        for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) in a clinical sample. Addict Behav 19, 307-17 (1994).
70.     Pomerleau, C.S., Pomerleau, O.F., Majchrzak, M.J., Kloska, D.D. & Malakuti, R. Relationship between
        nicotine tolerance questionnaire scores and plasma cotinine. Addict Behav 15, 73-80 (1990).
71.     Yasmin-Karim, S. et al. Enhancing the Therapeutic Efficacy of Cancer Treatment With Cannabinoids.
        Front Oncol 8, 114 (2018).
72.     Slavich, G.M. & Shields, G.S. Assessing Lifetime Stress Exposure Using the Stress and Adversity
        Inventory for Adults (Adult STRAIN): An Overview and Initial Validation. Psychosom Med 80, 17-27
        (2018).
73.     Buysse, D.J., Reynolds, C.F., 3rd, Monk, T.H., Berman, S.R. & Kupfer, D.J. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
        Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 28, 193-213 (1989).
74.     Schmidt, U., Simunec, D., Piso, P., Klempnauer, J. & Schlitt, H.J. Quality of life and functional long-term
        outcome after partial pancreatoduodenectomy: pancreatogastrostomy versus pancreatojejunostomy. Ann
        Surg Oncol 12, 467-72 (2005).
75.     Fitzsimmons, D. et al. Development of a disease specific quality of life (QoL) questionnaire module to
        supplement the EORTC core cancer QoL questionnaire, the QLQ-C30 in patients with pancreatic cancer.
        EORTC Study Group on Quality of Life. Eur J Cancer 35, 939-41 (1999).
76.     Fitzsimmons, D. et al. Symptoms and quality of life in chronic pancreatitis assessed by structured
        interview and the EORTC QLQ-C30 and QLQ-PAN26. Am J Gastroenterol 100, 918-26 (2005).
77.     Al-Hawary, M.M. et al. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma radiology reporting template: consensus
        statement of the society of abdominal radiology and the american pancreatic association.
        Gastroenterology 146, 291-304.e1 (2014).
78.     National Cancer Institute Best Practices for Biospecimen Resources: National Cancer Institute, N.I.o.H.,
        U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (June 2007).
79.     Ivanics, T. et al. Patient-derived xenograft cryopreservation and reanimation outcomes are dependent on
        cryoprotectant type. Lab Invest 98, 947-956 (2018).
80.     Roife, D. et al. Ex Vivo Testing of Patient-Derived Xenografts Mirrors the Clinical Outcome of Patients with
        Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 22, 6021-6030 (2016).
81.     Roife, D. et al. Generation of patient-derived xenografts from fine needle aspirates or core needle biopsy.
        Surgery 161, 1246-1254 (2017).
82.     Delitto, D. et al. Human pancreatic cancer xenografts recapitulate key aspects of cancer cachexia.
        Oncotarget (2016).

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
83.     Go, K.L. et al. Orthotopic Patient-Derived Pancreatic Cancer Xenografts Engraft Into the Pancreatic
        Parenchyma, Metastasize, and Induce Muscle Wasting to Recapitulate the Human Disease. Pancreas
        (2017).
84.     Quantitative Imaging Network. National Cancer Institute. Available from:
        http://imaging.cancer.gov/informatics/qin; [Aug 2016].
85.     Clark, K. et al. The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA): maintaining and operating a public information
        repository. J Digit Imaging 26, 1045-57 (2013).
86.     Al-Hawary, M.M. et al. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma radiology reporting template: consensus
        statement of the society of abdominal radiology and the american pancreatic association.
        Gastroenterology 146, 291-304 e1 (2014).
87.     Vigano, A., Del Fabbro, E., Bruera, E. & Borod, M. The cachexia clinic: from staging to managing
        nutritional and functional problems in advanced cancer patients. Crit Rev Oncog 17, 293-303 (2012).
88.     Oldenmenger, W.H., de Raaf, P.J., de Klerk, C. & van der Rijt, C.C. Cut points on 0-10 numeric rating
        scales for symptoms included in the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale in cancer patients: a
        systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage 45, 1083-93 (2013).
89.     Chang, J.I., Huang, B.Z. & Wu, B.U. Impact of Integrated Health Care Delivery on Racial and Ethnic
        Disparities in Pancreatic Cancer. Pancreas 47, 221-226 (2018).
90.     Luque, J.S. et al. Formative research on perceptions of biobanking: what community members think. J
        Cancer Educ 27, 91-9 (2012).
91.     Schmotzer, G.L. Barriers and facilitators to participation of minorities in clinical trials. Ethn Dis 22, 226-30
        (2012).
92.     Sheppard, V.B., Mays, D., LaVeist, T. & Tercyak, K.P. Medical mistrust influences black women's level of
        engagement in BRCA 1/2 genetic counseling and testing. J Natl Med Assoc 105, 17-22 (2013).
93.     Halbert, C.H., McDonald, J., Vadaparampil, S., Rice, L. & Jefferson, M. Conducting Precision Medicine
        Research with African Americans. PLoS One 11, e0154850 (2016).
94.     Reddy, A. et al. Privacy Concerns About Personal Health Information and Fear of Unintended Use of
        Biospecimens Impact Donations by African American Patients. J Cancer Educ 35, 522-529 (2020).
95.     Davis, T.C., Arnold, C.L., Mills, G. & Miele, L. A Qualitative Study Exploring Barriers and Facilitators of
        Enrolling Underrepresented Populations in Clinical Trials and Biobanking. Front Cell Dev Biol 7, 74 (2019).
96.     Joseph, G. & Dohan, D. Recruiting minorities where they receive care: Institutional barriers to cancer
        clinical trials recruitment in a safety-net hospital. Contemp Clin Trials 30, 552-9 (2009).
97.     Cook, E.D. et al. Recruitment practices for U.S. minority and underserved populations in NRG oncology:
        Results of an online survey. Contemp Clin Trials Commun 10, 100-104 (2018).
98.     Bailey, P. et al. Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer. Nature 531, 47-52
        (2016).
99.    Collisson, E.A. et al. Subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and their differing responses to
       therapy. Nat Med 17, 500-3 (2011).
100.   Moffitt, R.A. et al. Virtual microdissection identifies distinct tumor- and stroma-specific subtypes of
        pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet 47, 1168-78 (2015).
101.    Integrated Genomic Characterization of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell 32, 185-203.e13
        (2017).
102.    Liu, J. et al. An Integrated TCGA Pan-Cancer Clinical Data Resource to Drive High-Quality Survival
        Outcome Analytics. Cell 173, 400-416.e11 (2018).
103.    Kiviniemi, M.T. et al. Pilot intervention outcomes of an educational program for biospecimen research
        participation. J Cancer Educ 28, 52-9 (2013).
104.    Adams-Campbell, L.L. et al. Predictors of biospecimen donation in the Black Women's Health Study.
        Cancer Causes Control 27, 797-803 (2016).
105.    Beato F, R.D., Dezsi KB, Ortiz A, Johnson JO, Chen DT, Ali K, Yoder SJ, Jeong D, Malafa M, Hodul P,
        Jiang K, Centeno BA, Abdallah MA, Balasi JA, Tassielli AF, Sarcar B, Teer JK, DeNicola GM, Permuth JB,
        Fleming JB. Establishing a LivingBiobank of Patient-Derived Organoids of Intraductal Papillary Mucinous
        Neoplasms of the Pancreas. bioRxiv doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.11.283168.


a. c.
b.

                                                                                           Individuals Identified and Assessed for Eligibility (n=350)
                                                                                                  (264 NHW, 32 AA, 53 H/L, 1 Unknown R/E)
           Eligible, Not Consented (n=18)                             Eligible (n=323)
 -  Deferred until a future visit (n=10)                                                                                                      Ineligible (n=27)
                                                                 (243 NHW, 30 AA, 50 H/L)
 -  Lost to follow up (n=2)                                                                                                           (21 NHW, 2 AA, 3 H/L, 1 Asian)
 -  Declined: feeling overwhelmed (n=2)
                                                                                                            - Not being of self-reported eligible ancestry (n=1)
 -  Declined: pursue care at another facility (n=1)
                                                                                                            - Ineligible diagnosis or prior treatment involving the pancreas (n=8)
 -  Declined: patient decided to not complete                       Consented (n=305)                       - Unwilling or unable to voluntarily provide informed consent (n=9)
    study procedures (n=1)                                       (228 NHW, 30 AA, 47 H/L)                   - Unwilling to complete study procedures (n=9)
 -  Treatment of pancreas prior to consent (n=2)
    Survey Completion                                                    Blood Collections               Biopsy             Surgical Resections (n=175)
                                    CT Image Collections
                                                                                                   Collections (n=4)         (140 NHW, 14 AA, 21 H/L)
Baseline (n=189)                 Baseline (n=231)                   Baseline (n=264)                 (3 NWH, 1 AA)
(148 NHW, 17 AA, 24 H/L)         (178 NHW, 15 AA, 39 H/L)           (198 NHW, 43 AA, 23 H/L)
                                                                                                                                         Surgical Resections with Tissue Collection (n=159)
Follow-up 1 (n=78)               Follow-up 1 (n=20)                 Follow-up 1 (n=77)
(62 NHW, 3 AA, 13 H/L)                                              (60 NHW, 13 AA, 4 H/L)                                         Tissue Types: PT (n=124), NP (n=136), AD-O (n=152), AD-S
                                 (16 NHW, 4 H/L)                                                                                  (n-154), MU (n=149), Sites of Metastasis (n=2)
Follow-up 2 (n=13)               Follow-up 2 (n=2)                  Follow-up 2 (n=27)                                             PT-NP Pairs (n=119; 92 NHW, 11 AA, 16 H/L)
(12 NHW, 1 H/L)                  (1 NHW, 1 H/L)                     (23 NHW, 3 AA, 1 H/L)                                          Diagnoses: PDAC (n=82), IPMN (n=24), MCN (n=5), PNET
                                                                                                                                  (n=19), Other (n=29)
                            Biopsy Samples Not Collected (n=13)                                                                          Surgical Resections, Samples Not Collected (n=16)
 - Samples need for diagnostic purposes (n=7)                                                                                       -  Surgery aborted due to metastasis (n=4)
 - Lesion too small to undergo sampling (n=1)                                                                                       -  Surgery aborted due to unresectable tumor (n=1)
 - Vessel obstruction was observed (n=1)                                                                                            -  No visible pancreas tumor found at surgery (n=3)
 - Samples needed for diagnostic purposes and vessel obstruction was observed (n=2)                                                 -  Surgery canceled due to comorbidities (n=1)
 - Samples prioritized for interventional clinical trial collection (n=2)                                                           -  Logistical issues , such as no available staff possibly due
                                                                                                                                       to late surgical collections, change in procedure type, or
                                                                                                                                       COVID-19 restrictions (n=7)

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                               All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Table 1. Summary of Florida Pancreas Collaborative biobank contents and time-points for collection.
                                                                                                                       Time-point
Biobank contents                                                                                          Baseline 6 months 12 months
Health Screen                                                                                                  X            X             X
Study Questionnaire                                                                                            X            X             X
Clinical, laboratory, imaging, and pathologic data abstracted from the medical record and/or
                                                                                                               X            X             X
requested from the Florida Cancer Data System
Blood processed for plasma and serum (and DNA for ancestry analysis in the future)                             X            X             X
Tissue from surgery (or biopsy): pancreas tumor (PT), normal pancreas (NP), adipose-                                        a              a
                                                                                                               X
subcutaneous (AD-S), adipose-omental (AD-O), and muscle (MU)
Computed tomography (CT) images                                                                                X            X             X
 a
   Tissue to be collected for research if a procedure is being performed as part of clinical care.

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Table 2. Data elements solicited in the Florida Pancreas Collaborative Baseline Study Questionnaire or Case Report Forms (CRF).
Baseline Questionnaire                                                                                          Case Report Forms
Section                                Information requested                                                    CRF/Module                                                 Information requested
Demographics                           Age, gender identity, race, ethnicity, marital status                    Chief Complaints and Comorbidities                         Detailed list of presenting symptoms and comorbidities
                                       Education                                                                                                                           Performance status-Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
                                       Insurance status
                                       Occupational history                                                     Anthropometrics and Lab Values                             Height, weight, body mass index (BMI) and weight-to-hip-ratio (WHR)
                                                                                                                                                                           Serum CRP, bilirubin, albumin, CEA and CA 19-9 levels
Personal History of Cancer             Cancer type(s), age(s) at diagnosis, treatment(s) received                                                                          Pancreatic cyst fluid: amylase, CEA and CA 19-9 levels
 and other medical conditions          Condition Name(s), age(s) at diagnosis, treatment(s) received
                                       Cancer Screening History                                                 Radiologic Reporting                                       Type(s) and date(s) of imaging performed (e.g. MRI, CT or EUS)
                                                                                                                                                                           Pancreatic parenchymal phase (appearance, size and location)
Risk factors                           Height, weight                                                                                                                      Pancreatic duct narrowing dilatation, termination
                                       Dietary history                                                                                                                     Evaluation of arterial, venous and extrapancreatic contact
                                       Physical activity                                                                                                                   Impression: tumor size and location
                                       Menstrual and reproductive history (females only)                                                                                   Metastases-location
                                       Alcohol consumption
                                       Tobacco and medical marijuana use                                        Staging                                                    Clinical staging
                                       Sleep habits
                                       Medication use (aspirin, statins, metformin)                             Radiology Body Composition Analysis                        Abdominal/visceral adiposity
                                       Chemical exposures                                                                                                                  Psoas index, Skeletal muscle index
                                                                                                                Diagnosis and Treatment Recommendaitons                    Diagnosis
Family history of cancer               Diagnosis                                                                                                                           Surgical recommendation
 and other medical conditions          Family member's relation to proband                                                                                                 *Types of neo-adjuvant therapy, including drug(s) and dose(s)
                                       Age at diagnosis                                                                                                                    Neo-adjuvant therapy start and end date
                                       Genetic testing results                                                                                                             *Types of adjuvant therapy, including drug(s) and doses
                                                                                                                                                                           Adjuvant therapy start and end date
Social support and quality of life     Cancer-specific functional scales
                                       Pancreatic cancer related symptoms                                       Surgery                                                    American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class
                                       Patient's perspective on optimism vs pessimism                                                                                      **Type of procedures performed (ie whipple, distal pancreatectomy)
                                                                                                                                                                           Lymph nodes (total and number positive)
                                                                                                                                                                           Size and location of lesion
                                                                                                                                                                           Post-op diagnosis
                                                                                                                                                                           Drains placed in operating room (OR)(total and type)
                                                                                                                                                                           Stent placement
                                                                                                                                                                           Estimated blood loss
                                                                                                                                                                           Pancreatic gland texture
                                                                                                                                                                           Vascular resection and type of reconstruction
                                                                                                                                                                           Feeding tube placement
                                                                                                                Pathology                                                  Histology/Behavior (ICD-0-3) and grade
                                                                                                                                                                           Size
                                                                                                                                                                           Tumor (T) nodes (N) and metastases (M) stage
                                                                                                                                                                           Pancreatic, biliary and SMA margin status
                                                                                                                                                                           Lymph node involvement (total examined, number positive)
                                                                                                                                                                           Grades of IPMN and PanIN involved, if applicable
                                                                                                                Post-op Course and Complications                           Complication type(s)
                                                                                                                                                                           Total Parenteral Nutrition and tube feed status
                                                                                                                                                                           Leaks present (non-pancreas, anastomotic, pancreatic fistula)
                                                                                                                                                                           Detailed list of conditions presented during post-op
                                                                                                                                                                           Length of Intensive Care Unit and hospital stay
                                                                                                                                                                           Post-op death status
                                                                                                                                                                           Diet on discharge
                                                                                                                                                                           Reasons for readmission
                                                                                                                Follow-up                                                  Date of last patient contact, vital status
                                                                                                                                                                           Recurrence status (date, treatment type)
                                                                                                                                                                           Overall, disease free and disease specific survival (in months)
   Notes: *Chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, hormone or targeted therapy; **Surgery, diagnostic staging laparoscopy, intra-operative ultrasound, and frozen section.
   Abbreviations: CA-19-9=Cancer antigen 19-9; CRP=C-reactive protein; WBC=White blood cells; CEA=Carcinoembryonic antigen; MRI=magnetic resonance imaging; CT=computed tomography;
   EUS=endoscopic ultrasound; SMA=Superior mesenteric artery; IPMN=intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; PanIN=pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                 All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
           Table 3. Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of Florida Pancreas Collaborative study participants, by race/ethnicity.
                                                All Participants African American (N= Hispanic/Latinx          Non-Hispanic White
Variable                                             (N=305)                 30)                (N=47)                (N=228)              P -Value
Age (years), mean (+/- SD)                           68 (10.6)            64 (12.1)            63 (12.8)              70 (9.4)              0.0001
Gender, n (%)
     Female                                         161 (52.8)            17 (56.7)            30 (63.8)             114 (50%)              0.2028
     Male                                           144 (47.2)            13 (43.3)            17 (36.2)             114 (50%)
Education level†, n(%)
     High school or GED                              46 (31.1)             6 (54.5)             6 (42.9)              34 (27.6)             0.1599
     College                                         65 (43.9)             4 (36.4)             7 (50.0)              54 (43.9)
     Post graduate                                   37 (25.0)             1 (9.1)              1 (7.1)               35 (28.5)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           157                    19                   33                   105
              †
Income Level , n (%)
     Below $40k                                      38 (26.0)             6 (54.5)             4 (30.8)              28 (22.9)             0.2049
     $40k-100k                                       42 (28.8)             2 (18.2)             3 (23.1)              37 (30.3)
     100k and above                                  34 (23.3)             1 (9.1)              1 (7.7)               32 (26.3)
     Information not provided by Participant         32 (21.9)             2 (18.2)             5 (38.5)              25 (20.5)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           159                    19                   34                   106
                   †
Health Insurance , n (%)
     Insured                                        143 (97.9)            10 (90.9)           13 (100.0)             120 (98.4)             0.2301
     Uninsured                                        3 (2.1)              1 (9.1)              0 (0.0)                2 (1.6)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           159                    19                   34                   106
Marital Status†, n (%)
     Not married                                     38 (26.0)             5 (45.5)             2 (15.4)              31 (25.4)             0.0376
     Married                                        107 (73.2)             5 (45.5)            11 (84.6)              91 (74.6)
     Information not provided by Participant          1 (0.8)              1 (9.0)              0 (0.0)                0 (0.0)
     Data not yet available                            159                    19                   34                   106
Family History of Pancreatic Cancer†, n (%)
     No                                              87 (67.4)             8 (72.7)             6 (66.7)              73 (67.0)             0.8005
     Yes                                             16 (12.4)             0 (0.0)              1 (11.1)              15 (13.8)
     Participant does not know                       26 (20.2)             3 (27.3)             2 (22.2)              21 (19.2)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           176                    19                   38                   119
Distress‡, n (%)
     No                                              36 (12.4)             3 (11.1)             7 (14.9)              26 (12.0)             0.8309
     Yes                                            255 (87.6)            24 (88.9)            40 (85.1)             191 (88.0)
     Data not yet availableɸ                            14                     3                   0                     11
Depression‡, n (%)
     No                                             189 (64.9)            20 (74.1)            33 (70.2)             136 (62.7)             0.3579
     Mild depression                                 43 (14.8)             4 (14.8)             3 (6.4)               36 (16.6)
     Moderate depression                             40 (13.8)             1 (3.7)              7 (14.9)              32 (14.7)
     Severe depression                               19 (6.5)               2 (7.4)             4 (6.4)               13 (6.0)
     Data not yet availableɸ                            14                     3                   0                     11
Smoking status†‡, n (%)
     No                                             129 (44.3)             14 (50)             32 (68.1)              83 (38.4)             0.0055
     Former smoker                                  127 (43.6)            10 (35.7)            12 (25.5)             105 (48.6)
     Current smoker                                  35 (12.1)             4 (14.3)             3 (6.4)               28 (13.0)
     Data not yet availableɸ                            14                     2                   0                     12
                  †
Marijuana status , n (%)
     No                                              97 (71.9)              5 (50)             10 (90.9)              82 (71.9)             0.1662
     Former user                                     25 (18.5)              3 (30)              0 (0.0)               22 (19.3)
     Current user                                    13 (9.6)               2 (20)              1 (9.1)               10 (8.8)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           170                    20                   36                   114
Abdominal Pain¶, n (%)
     No                                              78 (38.8)            12 (46.2)            11 (31.4)              55 (39.3)             0.0948
     Yes                                            100 (49.8)            13 (50.0)            23 (65.7)              64 (45.7)
     Information unavailble in EMR                   23 (11.4)             1 (3.8)              1 (2.9)               21 (15.0)
     Data not yet availableɸ                           104                     4                   12                    88
Fatigue¶, n (%)
     No                                             148 (52.5)            15 (53.6)            20 (45.5)             113 (53.8)             0.0975
     Yes                                             98 (34.7)            12 (42.8)            21 (47.7)              65 (31.0)
     Information unavailble in EMR                   36 (12.8)             1 (3.6)              3 (6.8)               32 (15.2)
     Data not yet availableɸ                            23                     2                   3                     18

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                              All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
GI Bleeding¶, n (%)
     No                                         217 (77.0)          23 (82.1)          39 (88.6)          155 (73.8)         0.0346
     Yes                                           7 (2.5)           2 (7.1)            1 (2.3)             4 (1.9)
     Information unavailble in EMR               58 (20.5)           3 (10.8)           4 (9.1)            51 (24.3)
     Data not yet availableɸ                         23                  2                 3                  18
Jaundice¶, n (%)
     No                                         178 (62.9)          22 (78.6)          25 (55.6)          131 (62.4)         0.0129
     Yes                                         66 (23.3)           4 (14.3)          18 (40.0)           44 (21.0)
     Information unavailble in EMR               39 (13.8)           2 (7.1)            2 (4.4)            35 (16.6)
     Data not yet availableɸ                         22                  2                 2                  18
Weight Loss More Than 5%¶, n (%)
     No                                         133 (47.4)          22 (78.6)          25 (55.6)          131 (62.4)         0.0972
     Yes                                        115 (40.9)           4 (14.3)          18 (40.0)           44 (21.0)
     Information unavailble in EMR               33 (11.7)           2 (7.1)            2 (4.4)            35 (16.6)
     Data not yet availableɸ                         24                  2                 2                  18
Charlsons Comorbidity Index, n (%)
     0                                          164 (57.7)          16 (57.1)          27 (60.0)          121 (57.3)         0.6516
     <=2                                        101 (35.6)          11 (39.3)          13 (28.9)           77 (36.5)
     >=3                                          19 (6.7)           1 (3.6)            5 (11.1)           13 (6.2)
     Data not yet availableɸ                         21                  2                 2                  17
Personal History of Diabetes†¶, n (%)
     No                                         195 (68.4)           21 (75)            27 (60)           147 (69.3)         0.3464
     Yes                                         90 (31.6)            7 (25)            18 (40)            65 (30.7)
     Data not yet availableɸ                         20                  2                 2                  16
                                 †¶
Personal History of Pancreatitis , n (%)
     No                                         180 (79.6)          23 (85.2)          32 (86.5)          125 (77.2)         0.3745
     Yes                                         46 (20.4)           4 (14.8)           5 (13.5)           37 (22.8)
                            ɸ
     Data not yet available                          79                  3                 10                 66
Cachexia‡¶, n (%)
     refractory cachexia                           1 (3.8)           0 (0.0)            4 (8.9)             6 (3.1)          0.3098
     cachexia                                    76 (29.1)           4 (18.2)          16 (35.6)           56 (28.9)
     pre-cachexia                                26 (10.0)           4 (18.2)           2 (4.4)            20 (10.3)
     non cachectic                              149 (57.1)          14 (63.6)          23 (51.1)          112 (57.7)
     missing                                         44                  8                 2                  34
Body Mass Index (kg/m2)¶
    n, mean (SD)                               281, 27 (5.5)       26, 28 (5.2)       44, 25 (5.0)       211, 27 (5.5)       0.0348
Waist Circumference,¶
    n, mean (SD)                              231, 40 (12.7)       17, 39 (6.2)      37, 38 (13.5)      177, 40 (13.0)       0.6594
Histology¶, n (%)
     Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)    183 (61.4)          16 (57.2)          36 (78.3)          131 (58.5)         0.0200
     Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET)      35 (11.7)           7 (25.0)           3 (6.5)            25 (11.1)
     Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
     (IPMN)                                      35 (11.7)           1 (3.6)            2 (4.3)            32 (14.3)
     Mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN)                6 (2.0)           2 (7.1)            0 (0.0)             4 (1.8)
           §
     Other                                       39 (13.1)           2 (7.1)            5 (10.9)           32 (14.3)
     Data not yet availableɸ                          7                  2                 1                   4
                               ¶
Surgical Resection Attempted , n (%)
     No                                         146 (47.9)          17 (56.7)          26 (55.3)          103 (45.2)         0.2673
     Yes                                        159 (52.1)          13 (43.3)          21 (44.7)          125 (54.8)
Location of Tumor¶, n (%)
     Body                                        16 (14.0)           2 (33.3)           1 (4.8)            13 (13.3)         0.3351
     Diffuse                                     17 (14.9)           2 (33.3)           3 (14.3)           12 (12.4)
     Head                                        65 (57.0)           1 (16.7)          13 (61.8)           51 (52.6)
     Tail                                        13 (11.4)           0 (0.0)            1 (4.8)            12 (12.4)
     Other                                       13 (11.4)           1 (16.7)           3 (14.3)            9 (9.3)
     Data not yet availableɸ                        181                 24                 26                131
Stage¶, n (%)
     Stage 0                                     22 (14.1)           1 (20.0)           1 (4.5)            20 (16.3)         0.6547
     Stage I/II                                  87 (55.8)           3 (60.0)          14 (63.7)           70 (56.9)
     Stage III/IV                                41 (26.3)           1 (20.0)           7 (31.8)           33 (26.8)
     Data not yet availableɸ                        155                 25                 25                105
                                    ¶¥
Grade Exocrine Pancreatic Tumors , n (%)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.10.20209247.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
     Well diffferentiated                                         7 (8.0)                0 (0.0)                   3 (15.8)                4 (6.1)         0.1719
     Moderately differentiated                                   29 (32.9)               0 (0.0)                   9 (47.4)              20 (30.3)
     Poorly differentiated                                       21 (23.9)               1 (33.3)                  4 (21.0)              16 (24.2)
     Grade undetermined                                          31 (35.2)               2 (66.7)                  3 (15.8)              26 (39.4)
     Data not yet availableɸ                                       136                      16                        19                    101
Grade IPMN¶, n (%)
     Low grade                                                   12 (34.3)               0 (0.0)                   1 (50.0)              11 (34.4)         1.0000
     Borderline                                                   2 (5.7)                0 (0.0)                   0 (0.0)                 2 (6.3)
     Carcinoma-in-situ                                           5 (14.3)                0 (0.0)                   0 (0.0)                5 (15.6)
     Invasive carcinoma                                           1 (2.9)                0 (0.0)                   0 (0.0)                 1 (3.1)
     Unknown grade                                               15 (42.9)              1 (100.0)                  1 (50.0)              13 (40.6)
Positive Lymph Nodes¶, n (%)
     No                                                         110 (94.8)              5 (100.0)                 17 (89.5)              88 (95.7)         0.6800
     Yes                                                          6 (5.2)                0 (0.0)                   2 (10.5)                4 (4.3)
     Data not yet availableɸ                                       189                      25                        28                    136
 †Data  available from partially-or fully-completed baseline questionnaires at time of analysis.
 ɸData  not yet available. Additional data will be included in future analyses when entered into the DatStat system.
 ‡Data  available from the health screen questionnaire at time of analysis.
 ¶Data available from case report forms (CRFs) at time of analysis.
 §The ‘Other’ category includes benign and malignant tumors of pancreatic, liver and bile duct, renal, adrenal gland, lymph node, and unclassified origin.
 ¥The grade for exocrine tumors has been restricted to PDAC, IPMN, and MCN (n=224).
