medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Assessing Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices towards Causal Directed Acyclic Graphs among
    Epidemiologists and Medical Researchers: a qualitative research project
    Ruby Barnard-Mayers1, Ellen Childs2, Laura Corlin3, Ellen Caniglia4, Matthew P Fox1,5, John P.
    Donnelly6,7, Eleanor J Murray1
    Affiliations
    1
      Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston MA USA
    2
      Division of Health and Environment, Abt Associates, Cambridge, MA USA
    3
      Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
    MA
    4
      Department of Population Health, School of Medicine, New York University, New York NY
    5
      Department of Global Health, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston MA USA
    6
      Department of Learning Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
    7
      Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
    Abstract
    Background: Estimating the strength of causal effects is an important component of epidemiologic
    research, and causal graphs provide a key tool for optimizing the validity of these effect estimates.
    Although a large literature exists on the mathematical theory underlying the use of causal graphs,
    including directed acyclic graphs, to assess and describe causal assumptions, and translate these
    assumptions into appropriate statistical analysis plans, less literature exists to aid applied researchers in
    understanding how best to develop and use causal graphs in their research projects.
    Objective We sought to understand this gap by surveying practicing epidemiologists and medical
    researchers on their knowledge, level of interest, attitudes, and practices towards the use of causal graphs
    in applied epidemiology and health research.
    Methods We conducted an anonymous survey of self-identified epidemiology and health researchers via
    Twitter and via the Society of Epidemiologic Research membership listserv. The survey was conducted
    using Qualtrics and asked a series of multiple choice and open-ended questions about causal graphs.
    Results In total, 439 responses were collected. Overall, a majority of participants reported being
    comfortable with using causal graphs and reported using them ‘sometimes’, ‘often’, or ‘always’ in their
    research. Almost three quarters of respondents had received formal training on causal graphs (typically
    causal directed acyclic graphs). Having received training appeared to improve comprehension of the
    underlying assumptions of causal graphs. Many of the respondents who did not use causal graphs
    reported lack of knowledge as a barrier to using DAGs in their research. Of the participants who did not
    use DAGs, many expressed that trainings, either in-person or online, would be useful resources to help
    them use causal graphs more often in their research.
    Conclusion Causal graphs are of interest to epidemiologists and medical researchers, but there are several
    barriers to their uptake. Additional training and clearer guidance are needed. In addition, methodological
    developments regarding visualization of effect measure modification and interaction on causal graphs is
    needed.
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Introduction
    Causal inference is a growing field in epidemiologic research. To investigate a causal relationship,
    researchers must make several assumptions regarding the relationship between covariates, the exposure,
    the outcome, and the population of interest. Causal graphs are a useful tool for improving the clarity of
    these assumptions, questioning the validity of the assumptions, and designing appropriate data collection
    and analytic plans in light of them (Greenland, Pearl, and Robins 1999; Tennant et al. 2020). Causal
    graph is an umbrella term for visualizations that explain relationships between variables and provide a
    theoretical framework on which to base an etiologic study. Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), single world
    intervention graphs (SWIGs), decision trees, and finest fully randomized causally interpretable structured
    tree graphs (FFRCISTGs) are types of causal graphs. A detailed explanation of these types of causal
    graphs is outside the scope of this paper. Interested readers should refer to Causal Inference: What If
    (Hernan and Robins 2020) for a comprehensive description of causal graphs.
    A clear example of the utility of causal graphs in epidemiologic research is in exploring the birthweight
    paradox, outlined in Hernández-Díaz et al (2006). Infants born to women who smoke are more likely to
    be low birthweight and have higher mortality rates, compared to infants born to non-smokers. However,
    among infants who are low birthweight, infants born to smokers have lower risks of mortality than infants
    born to women who are non-smokers. The main reason for this paradox is selection bias, most easily
    understood through a DAG. In the article, the authors walk through seven different DAGs that illustrate
    the possible relationships between smoking, low birthweight and infant mortality. In addition to providing
    information on how bias may have skewed effect estimates for this relationship, these DAGs also serve as
    templates for other exposure/outcome networks that may be affected by selection bias. While DAGs are
    not the only means of detecting bias in causal investigations such as the birthweight paradox, they are a
    practical instrument for developing the theoretical structure for a study and can be critical to conducting
    sound analyses.
    Although the mathematical foundations of causal graphs have been well-specified, they have not been
    widely adopted in epidemiology and medical research (Greenland, Pearl, and Robins 1999; Hernan and
    Robins 2020; Pearl 1995; Tennant et al. 2020). We believe the reason for this implementation lag is the
    lack of available tools for the application of causal graphs in the study design and analysis phases of
    applied research studies. In anecdotal conversations with epidemiologists and other medical researchers,
    barriers to utilizing these models included uncertainty about which variables within a causal model to
    include in a statistical model, how to model complex or composite variables, and when to consider
    multiple time points or temporal ordering. While there are general mathematical axioms that provide
    some guidance on these questions, there are few resources that address them on a practical level.
    The aim of this project was to characterize the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of epidemiologists and
    other medical researchers in relation to the use of causal graphs in their applied research studies, focusing
    on causal DAGs. We conducted a survey of practicing epidemiologists and researchers in closely related
    fields (e.g., biostatistics, medicine, health services research). The goals of this survey were: (1) to
    determine knowledge of the basic principles of creating and interpreting causal graphs; (2) to determine
    attitudes towards, experiences with, and practices of the use of causal graphs for designing applied
    research studies in order to identify needs and guidance; and (3) to identify perceived barriers to the use
    of causal graphs.
    Methods
    Participants
    Our target population was researchers who work on applied epidemiology topics, whether or not they
    identify as epidemiologists, and who conduct at least some research in English. This is a large target

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    population, and we were not able to enumerate the potential participants. Instead, we used two strategies
    to identify survey participants. First, we disseminated the request for participation through social media,
    in particular via Twitter, capitalizing on the large community of epidemiologists and medical researchers
    who use Twitter for academic conversations under the hashtag #epitwitter. Second, we contacted the
    Society for Epidemiologic Research, the American Public Health Association, the American College of
    Epidemiology, and the EpiMonitor newsletter to request our survey be sent out to their members/readers.
    Survey development
    The questions used in this survey were the result of conversations and teaching experiences the authors
    had when discussing causal graphs. The questions in the knowledge portion of the survey were designed
    to differentiate those who knew basic DAG theory, including assumptions required to draw and interpret
    DAGs, based off of current teaching experience. Best practices for incorporating effect measure
    modification into DAGs is currently up for debate, even within this team of authors, and the question on
    this topic was designed to determine the prevalence of different attitudes within the research community.
    Part of the motivation for this research was to understand barriers to using DAGs in epidemiologic
    research and identify tools and resources that could overcome these barriers. The questions in parts three
    (attitudes) and four (practices) were designed to understand how participants felt about using DAGs in
    their own research and what tools they used or wanted to use in order to apply DAG methodology in their
    future work. Most questions had an “other” option that allowed participants to type in their own response
    to questions to ensure that we could capture possible responses that we may have overlooked in our built-
    in response options (see appendix).
    Survey distribution
    The original Twitter link was available for four weeks (August 7th, 2019 – September 3rd, 2019; see
    appendix) and 400 people responded over this time period. One week before the survey closed, we posted
    a reminder that the survey would be closing soon to encourage anyone with an incomplete survey to
    submit. All survey responses were submitted by the time the survey link closed. Data were analyzed the
    week following survey closure.
    The Society for Epidemiologic Research posted the survey link to Facebook and Twitter on November
    20th, and the survey accessible from those links was available for six weeks (see appendix). During those
    six weeks, 39 people participated in the survey. The other three organizations either did not respond to
    requests to distribute the survey or were unable to approve dissemination requests in the proposed time
    frame of the study.
    Data collection and analysis
    The survey was distributed using the Qualtrics platform and began with a description of the survey and
    informed consent materials. Participants who consented were asked to complete a section with basic
    demographic information, including gender, race/ethnicity, country where they work, type of organization
    (academic, governmental/NGO, industry), and highest level of education. For all questions, participants
    were able to select the option ‘choose not to respond’ or submit a written answer instead of selecting from
    the list of options. The survey next asked a series of questions designed to assess training, knowledge,
    comfort with, and preferences for causal graphs in applied epidemiology. The survey was exempted by
    the Boston University School of Public Health Institutional Review Board. The surveys were completely
    anonymous and no IP addresses were collected. The full survey text is provided in the Supplementary
    Online Materials.
    There were two open-ended survey questions asking participants to expand on their discomfort using
    DAGs and their attitudes about the usefulness of DAGs in a variety of research stages. We then used a
    grounded approach to code those responses into groups of similar responses, and systematically applied

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    those groupings across all responses for both qualitative questions, using Microsoft Excel (Strauss 2013;
    Glaser 1967). Qualitative survey results were collated and major themes and supporting ideas were
    identified by study personnel. All results were stratified by source of participants (direct social media
    versus society dissemination).
    Results
    The initial survey push (via the original Twitter link) garnered a total of 400 responses, while the Society
    for Epidemiologic Research-disseminated survey resulted in 39 new responses. Due to the limited number
    of responses to the Society for Epidemiologic Research-disseminated survey link, and because we could
    not verify that there was no overlap in respondents (since we did not collect IP addresses), the remainder
    of this paper will focus primarily on the results from the first, Twitter-based, version of the survey. Most
    participants identified as white and there were slightly more female-identifying participants. About a third
    of participants were students, and of those who were not students most worked in academia. Table 1
    shows the demographic and educational breakdown of the participants by survey version. The
    demographics of those who responded to the SER-disseminated survey generally matched the distribution
    in the original Twitter-disseminated survey.
    Knowledge
    Over two-thirds of the Twitter respondents reported that they had received formal training in causal
    graphs, mostly from graduate school courses. The most common causal graphs participants received
    training on were directed acyclic graphs (Greenland, Pearl, and Robins 1999), less than 20% received
    training on single world intervention graphs (Richardson and Robins 2013; Robins and Richardson 2010)
    and an even smaller proportion of participants were trained on the use of finest fully randomized causally
    interpretable structured tree graphs (Robins 1986).
    Responses to the knowledge assessment questions were mixed (Table 2 and Table 4). Half of respondents
    correctly identified that not drawing an arrow between two variables was a stronger assumption than
    drawing an arrow, which is a critical assumption for correct DAG usage. Respondents who reported
    having received training on causal graphs were more likely to choose the correct answer for this question
    and were less likely to be unsure about the answer than individuals who reported no training (Figure 1).
    Interestingly, while individuals who had completed an epidemiology program or who were current
    students in an epidemiology program were more likely to choose the correct answer than individuals in
    other fields, the type of training (graduate school course, workshop, or online training) did not appear to
    be associated with level of knowledge. When asked to choose which of two directed acyclic graphs
    (Figure 2), if true, allowed identification of the causal effect of post-traumatic stress disorder on suicide,
    62% of respondents chose the correct graph (this question assessed knowledge about the depiction of
    measurement error in DAGs). There was essentially no difference in performance on this question
    between individuals who did and did not report having received training in causal graphs. However,
    current students were more likely to choose the correct answer than non-students (Table 2).
    Attitudes
    Most respondents somewhat or strongly agreed that they were comfortable using causal graphs for
    designing data collection, identifying appropriate adjustments sets, evaluating existing studies, and
    assessing surprising study results, regardless of training history. Nearly 80% of respondents somewhat or
    strongly agreed that causal graphs were useful in a classroom setting for describing bias, in an applied
    research project at the study design or analysis phase, or in reviewing a paper or critiquing an existing
    study. Over half of participants indicated that a more complicated DAG was best for designing a research
    study (Figure 3c) and least useful for presenting study assumptions. The simpler DAGs shown in Figure
    3a and Figure 3b were rated as being more useful for presenting results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Effect measure modification and interaction are often of interest in epidemiology, but there are differing
    approaches to visualizing and assessing these features in a causal DAG, even amongst this research team
    (Hernan and Robins 2020). Several schools of thought exist on the appropriate approach, including that
    (1) arrows are agnostic to the presence or absence of effect modification and interaction and therefore all
    arrows potentially represent these relationships (Greenland, Pearl, and Robins 1999); (2) effect
    modification and interaction arise from the presence of alternate causes of the outcome of interest that
    vary in distribution by exposure status, and so can be displayed by including unknown common causes of
    exposure and outcome (VanderWeele and Robins 2007; Hernan and Robins 2020); and (3) effect
    modification can be shown by drawing an arrow from the modifier to another arrow, instead of a node
    (note that these are no longer DAGs, and should be referred to as causal graphs) (Weinberg 2007). When
    we asked respondents “to the best of your understanding, can effect modification be represented in a
    directed acyclic graph,” there was substantial disagreement (Table 3). Interestingly, those with no training
    were much more likely to choose ‘don’t know’ than those with any training (Table 3).
    Practices and barriers
    About 60% of participants responded that they used causal graphs in an applied epidemiology project at
    least sometimes. Of these participants, only 20% responded that they used systematic processes (literature
    reviews or expert consensus) to develop a graphical causal model. The remaining 80% either performed
    informal literature reviews and conversations or re-used already published models. The most common
    reason for not using a graphical causal model in applied epidemiology research was not knowing how to
    use them. When it came to challenges specifically associated with building causal graphs in epidemiology
    research, the most common challenge was choosing which arrows to omit, followed by choosing which
    arrows to include. In terms of assessing causal graphs in research, over half of participants found
    identifying potential unknown sources of error and identifying collider bias to be the two most
    challenging aspects.
    Respondents who reported regularly using causal graphs (“sometimes”, “often”, or “always” responses) in
    their research most frequently said reference material, software tools, and availability of pre-published
    causal graphs would be of most use in helping them decide to use causal graphs more often. On the other
    hand, respondents who did not use causal graphs (“rarely”, “once”, or “never” responses) said online
    training would be most valuable, followed by in-person training and software tools. Approximately twice
    as many respondents who reported not regularly using causal graphs indicated that journal or grant
    agency requirements to use causal graphs would be useful for their uptake of these methods, compared to
    respondents who reported regularly using causal graphs.
    Qualitative analysis of text responses
    Individuals who reported that they did not feel comfortable using causal graphs for designing data
    collection, identifying adjustment sets, evaluating studies or assessing surprising study results were given
    the opportunity to explain what aspects they were not comfortable with and what resources might help. A
    common theme among the responses was lack of knowledge contributing to discomfort using causal
    graphs. One participant wrote, “I haven’t received training in them at all but I feel like I should know
    more about them.” Other responses included more specific knowledge gaps. For example, one participant
    expressed concern about “How to incorporate effect modification, simultaneous bias, measurement error,”
    and another said, “Knowledge about how to correctly use the arrows.” Additionally, many participants
    wanted resources and training including a “resource library,” “access to experts,” and “online training
    materials.”
    Participants were also asked to expand on the usefulness of causal graphs in classrooms, designing
    research, analyzing results, and reviewing completed work. Many respondents addressed a lack of
    knowledge about causal graphs, with some general statements such as “I should study it more” and “I do
    not understand how it would be used in this context.” Some participants mentioned more specific gaps in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    knowledge including “how to depict moderation.” Additionally, several respondents expressed concern
    about the methodological components of causal graphs including that “some forms of bias are not
    amenable to being described by DAGs” and “molecular biology is often bi-directional which is never
    represented.” There were also a few participants who expressed concern over using DAGs for analysis,
    stating “analyses have to be done based on model formulas, not on DAGs” and “at the study analysis
    phase you stick to the analysis plan.”
    Society for Epidemiologic Research survey results
    In general, the responses from the Society for Epidemiologic Research-disseminated survey link were
    similar to those from the original Twitter survey. Most of the respondents in the Society for
    Epidemiologic Research-disseminated survey link reported using causal graphs in their research at least
    “sometimes”. Of these participants, almost all participants reported using informal methods (literature
    reviews and conversations) or re-using already published models to develop models for their research.
    Aligned with the original Twitter survey responses, reference materials were cited as the most useful tool
    to increase DAG usage among those who already use DAGs in research in the Society for Epidemiologic
    Research-disseminated survey. The most notable difference between the two surveys was that a higher
    proportion of respondents of the Society for Epidemiologic Research-disseminated survey link correctly
    answered that not drawing an arrow between two variables was a stronger assumption than drawing an
    arrow. Similar to the Twitter-distributed survey results, holding an epidemiology degree and being a
    student did not appear to be associated with correct responses (Table 4).
    Discussion
    A large proportion of participants who professionally engage in applied epidemiology agreed that causal
    graphs were useful for designing, analyzing and reading epidemiologic studies. Most of the respondents
    had been formally trained on causal graphs, the most common type being DAGs, and a majority
    expressed comfort in using causal graphs in their own research. However, only half of respondents
    correctly responded to the question on relational assumptions in DAGs and less than two-thirds correctly
    responded to the question about measurement error in DAGs. This suggests a gap between utilization of
    DAGs and knowledge about the proper use of DAGs. Those who received training appeared to have
    better knowledge about DAG operationalization, regardless of type of training, which may provide some
    support for developing additional trainings on causal graphs in a variety of formats, including online
    courses, reference books and in-person trainings. Further, most of the respondents who regularly use
    DAGs do not use a systematic process for developing the models, which may result in inaccurate DAGs
    and thus potentially fatal bias in studies based off those DAGs. The most common reason for not using
    DAGs in applied epidemiology projects was lack of knowledge. Those who did not use DAGs thought
    online or in-person trainings, as well as software tools, would help them use causal graphs more often.
    There was disagreement about the representation of effect measure modification in DAGs, mirroring the
    debate within our research team. Identifying effect measure modification is crucial for accurate and
    precise causal effects estimates and is thus an important concept to understand when building causal
    graphs. The variety of attitudes on representing effect measure modification in our survey responses,
    paired with the finding that many participants reported re-using already published DAGs for their own
    research, illustrate the need for consensus within the epidemiology community (Hernan and Robins
    2020). We were not able to explore the attitudes towards effect measure modification in DAGs further
    and propose this as an area of future research.
    Our findings build upon the findings of a recent, large, systematic review of published causal graphs in
    the epidemiologic literature (Tennant et al. 2020). There, the authors found that 38% of papers which
    claimed to have used DAGs did not include the model in the main text or supplementary material. Of the
    DAGs that were published, there were significant variations in terms of model design (i.e., number of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    nodes/arrows and use of unobserved variables) and DAG-based adjustment techniques. This may be
    explained, in part, by our finding that preference for the design of a research DAG varied depending on
    the purpose of the DAG (whether for designing a research study or for presenting study assumptions)
    (Figure 3). Additionally, the authors of the literature review reported that extraction errors were reduced
    when diagrams were constructed using DAGitty, a web-based platform for designing and exploring causal
    diagrams (Textor et al. 2016).
    Future directions. Our results demonstrate a need for more resources and guidance on the application of
    DAGs to epidemiology research. Although interest in and utilization of causal graphs is high, the lack of
    available training resources possibly contributes to the confusion and disagreement about DAG
    assumptions and rules. Promisingly, we saw relatively little difference in the level of knowledge about
    DAGs among those who had received graduate school training, workshop training, or online training,
    suggesting that increasing the availability of even a relatively low-intensity training may have substantial
    impact on the knowledge, and thus use of, causal graphs in epidemiology research. Finally, our results
    also suggest that improved guidance on the visualization and assessment of effect measure modification
    or interaction in causal graphs is necessary to address the uncertainty about this topic. Future research
    should also be focused on identifying explicit topics (i.e., expressing complex mixtures in DAGs) and
    training resources for researchers interested in using DAGs for study design and analysis.
    Limitations. One potential limitation of this study is that the sample is unlikely to be representative of all
    epidemiologists and medical researchers. In particular, it appears that women may have been somewhat
    more likely to participate than men, and current students may be over-represented. The sample of
    participants who completed the survey may not be generalizable to the population of all practicing
    epidemiologists, especially since the Society for Epidemiologic Research was the only organization that
    responded to our request within the given time frame. The subset of epidemiologists who use Twitter may
    be younger than those who do not, and, if so, may be more likely to have been exposed to causal
    inference topics (including causal graphs) during their graduate training. However, we are aware of no
    previous research on the application of causal graphs among epidemiologists, and as such this study will
    be a valuable guide to the development of more systematic assessments and the creation of tools to
    improve the implementation of causal graphs in applied epidemiologic research. Additionally, our
    questions were not externally validated to measure DAG knowledge, and while the questions asked in this
    survey were based off of years of teaching experience on DAGs and participants were able to expand on
    their responses via free form text, we may have misclassified DAG knowledge.
    Conclusion
    Overall, there is general agreement within the epidemiology community that graphic causal models are
    useful for both applied research and teaching purposes; however, a lack of training resources presents a
    barrier for their widespread use in practice. Generally, epidemiologists and medical researchers who
    received training in causal graphs were shown to have better knowledge about the underlying assumptions
    for building DAGs compared to those without any training, regardless of the intensity of training. Easily
    accessible resources that provide guidelines for creating evidenced-based DAGs are likely needed to
    increase DAG utilization, which may improve analytic adjustment for confounders in published
    epidemiologic research.
    Acknowledgements
    The authors would like to thank the survey participants, the Society for Epidemiological Research, and
    everyone on #epitwitter who helped spread the word about our survey.
    This study was partly funded by NICHD R21HD098733 (RBM, EJM).
    JPD was supported by grant K12-HL138039 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (National
    Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Conflict of interest
    Authors state no conflict of interest
    References
    Glaser, B. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Chicago:
          Aldine Publishing Company.
    Greenland, Sander, Judea Pearl, and James M Robins. 1999. “Causal Diagrams for Epidemiologic
          Research.” Epidemiology 10 (1): 37–48.
    Hernan, Miguel A, and James M Robins. 2020. Causal Inference: What If. Boca Raton: Chapman &
          Hill/CRC.
    Hernández-Díaz, Sonia, Enrique F Schisterman, and Miguel A Hernán. 2006. “The Birth Weight
          ‘Paradox’ Uncovered?” American Journal of Epidemiology 164 (11): 1115–20.
          https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwj275.
    Pearl, Judea. 1995. “Causal Diagrams for Empirical Research.” Biometrika 82 (4): 669.
          https://doi.org/10.2307/2337329.
    Richardson, Thomas S, and James M Robins. 2013. “Single World Intervention Graphs (SWIGs): A
          Unification of the Counterfactual and Graphical Approaches to Causality.”
    Robins, James. 1986. “A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies with a Sustained
          Exposure Period-Application to Control of the Healthy Worker Survivor Effect.” Mathematical
          Modelling 7 (9–12): 1393–1512. https://doi.org/10.1016/0270-0255(86)90088-6.
    Robins, James, and Thomas Richardson. 2010. “Alternative Graphical Causal Models and the
          Identification of Direct Effects.”
    Strauss, AL. 2013. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques.
          Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications.
    Tennant, Peter WG, Wendy J Harrison, Eleanor J Murray, Kellyn F Arnold, Laurie Berrie, Matthew P
          Fox, Sarah C Gadd, et al. 2020. “Use of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) in Applied Health
          Research: Review and Recommendations.” MedRxiv, no. January.
          https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.20.19015511.
    Textor, Johannes, Benito van der Zander, Mark K. Gilthorpe, Maciej Liskiewicz, and George T.H.
          Ellison. 2016. “Roboust Causal Inference Using Directed Acyclic Graphs: The R Package
          ‘Dagitty.’” International Journal of Epidemiology 45 (6): 1887–94.
    VanderWeele, Tyler J., and James M. Robins. 2007. “Four Types of Effect Modification: A Classification
          Based on Directed Acyclic Graphs.” Epidemiology 18 (5): 561–68.
          https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e318127181b.
    Weinberg, Clarice R. 2007. “Can DAGs Clarify Effect Modification?” Epidemiology.
          https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e318126c11d.

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                           It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
      Table 1. Demographic information of survey respondents, stratified by survey version.
                                                                         Twitter Respondents               Society Respondents
                                                                                    (N = 400)                            (N=39)
Current gender                                                                        n=383                               n=36
         Woman                                                                                205 (54%)                              21 (58%)
         Man                                                                                  167 (44%)                              15 (42%)
         Non-binary, gender-fluid, or other                                                         5 (1%)                               0 (0%)
         Prefer not to say                                                                          6 (2%)                               0 (0%)
Race / ethnicity [select all that apply]                                              n=411                               n=40
           Black, including African American & African                                             17 (4%)                               1 (3%)
           Asian, including East Asian and South Asian                                           52 (13%)                              6 (15%)
           Middle Eastern or North African                                                         11 (3%)                               3 (8%)
           Indigenous, including Native American, First                                             5 (1%)                               0 (0%)
           Nations, Aboriginal, Metis; Pacific Islander
           or Native Hawaiian
           White                                                                              286 (70%)                              26 (65%)
           Hispanic                                                                                24 (6%)                               3 (8%)
           Other                                                                                    9 (2%)                               1 (3%)
           Prefer not to say                                                                        7 (2%)                               0 (0%)
Current student status                                                                n=383                               n=36
           Yes                                                                                131 (34%)                              14 (39%)
           No                                                                                 252 (66%)                              22 (61%)
      Program of study, current students                                              n=128                               n=14
           Masters of Science                                                                       9 (9%)                               1 (7%)
           Masters of Public Health                                                                 8 (8%)                               1 (7%)
           PhD, ScD, or equivalent                                                               79 (77%)                            12 (86%)
           MD; Combined MD-PhD or equivalent                                                        3 (2%)                               0 (0%)
           Other or prefer not to say                                                               3 (2%)                               0 (0%)
       Highest level of education, non-students                                       n = 245                             n = 22
           Master of Science or Master of Arts                                                     13 (7%)                             3 (14%)
           Master of Public Health                                                                 13 (7%)                               0 (0%)
           PhD, ScD, or equivalent                                                            130 (70%)                              12 (55%)
           Medical Doctorate; combined MD-PhD or                                                 25 (13%)                              6 (27%)
           equivalent
           Other / prefer not to say                                                                6 (4%)                               0 (0%)
Field of study (n = 373, 36)                                                          n=373                               n=36
           Epidemiology                                                                       202 (54%)                              22 (61%)
           Public Health                                                                         43 (12%)                              5 (14%)
           Health Services Research                                                                15 (4%)                               2 (6%)
           Medicine                                                                                30 (8%)                               2 (6%)
           Biostatistics                                                                           14 (4%)                               2 (6%)
           Other                                                                                 69 (18%)                                3 (8%)

Table 2. Correct responses to the question “Which of the following directed acyclic graphs, if correct, would imply that the true causal
effect of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) on suicide could be estimated without error? (select all that apply)” by student status,
degree field and training. The assessed causal DAGs are shown in Figure 2. For both surveys, the correct choice was DAG B (Figure 2b).
                                       Correct (Twitter Survey)          Correct (SER Link)
 Student Status
          Current Student             71.00%                            71.40%
          Not a Student               57.80%                            63.60%
 Degree Field
          Epidemiology                60.90%                            66.70%
          Other Field                 64.50%                            66.70%
 Training on DAGs
          Received Training           62.20%                            75.00%
          No Training                 60.90%                            66.70%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
       Table 3. Responses to the question “To the best of your understanding, can effect modification be
       represented in a directed acyclic graph?” from the original Twitter survey by student status, degree
       field, and training type.
                                                 Yes, without             Yes, with
                                               modification of         modification of                  No         Don’t Know
                                               the typical rules       the typical rules                (%)              (%)
                                                      (%)                     (%)
     Student Status
               Current Student                       17.31                   40.38                    24.04             18.27
               Not a Student                         20.86                   26.74                    29.41             22.99
     Degree Field
               Epidemiology                          17.47                   37.35                    33.33             13.86
               Other Field                           22.58                   24.19                    22.58             30.65
     Training on DAGs
               Received Training                     20.67                   36.54                    31.73             11.06
               No Training                           14.81                   18.52                    17.28             49.38
       Table 4. Percentage of respondents from each survey version who correctly identified that not drawing
       an arrow on a DAG is a stronger assumption than drawing an arrow, by student status, degree field,
       and training type.
                                                                 Original Twitter Link                      SER-disseminated Link
                                                                            (%)                                      (%)
     Student Status
               Current Student                                            47.12                                     71.43
               Not a Student                                              52.94                                     73.33
     Degree Field
               Epidemiology                                               56.02                                     75.00
               Other Field                                                44.35                                     70.00
     Training on DAGs
               Received Training                                          57.69                                     70.83
               No Training                                                34.57                                     85.71

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.17.20017939.this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Figure 1: Bar graph of responses to the question “To the best of your understanding, which of the
    following is the stronger assumption in a directed acyclic graph (DAG)?” by causal graph training
    status. Possible responses were “Drawing an arrow between two variables ” (incorrect); “Not
    drawing an arrow between two variables” (correct) and “I don’t know”.
                                                      Received Training          Did Not Receive Training
                                                                        58%
                                     38%
                       34%                                                           35%
                                                                                                                                   27%
                                                                                                                      9%
                       INCORRECT                                         CORRECT                                    DON'T KNOW
    Figure 2: Suggested directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) demonstrating assumptions about
    measurement error for depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Survey respondents
    were asked “Which of the following directed acyclic graphs, if correct, would imply that the true
    causal effect of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) on suicide could be estimated without error?
    (select all that apply)”. For response summary, see Table 2.
    Figure 3: Three approaches to drawing directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) for study design, and
    presentation of research assumptions. Survey respondents were asked to rank the options in order
    from most (1) to least (3) useful for presenting research results and from most (1) to least (3) useful
    for designing the study. The goal of this question was to assess attitudes towards node complexity in
    causal DAGs.
