medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
            Bangla Technique of Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy: a Novel, Safe and Cost-effective
                                       modification of American and French Techniques
          Md Jafrul Hannan1, Mosammat Kohinoor Parveen2, Alak Kumar Nandy3
                1
                  Department of Pediatric Surgery
                South Point Hospital
                Chittagong, Bangladesh
                2
                  Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics
                 Rangamati Medical College
                Rangamati, Bangladesh
                3
                  Department of Anesthesiology
                ChattagramMaa-O-Shishu Hospital Medical College
                Chittagong, Bangladesh
          Word Count: 3026
          Corresponding author:
          Md. Jafrul Hannan
          Mobile: +8801819345305
          Apt – B3, House – 72/A, Road – 1, Panchlaish, Chittagong, Bangladesh 4203
          jafrulhannan@gmail.com
          Funding information: There was no third party funding that contributed to this research.
                                                               Running Title
                                       Bangla Technique of Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
                                                               Mini Abstract
          Laparoscopic cholecystectomy can be performed following the American or the French
          approach. The present paper proposes an alternative to the American and the French
          approaches referred to as the Bangla technique, which uses a standard four port approach but
          requires the presence of only one assistant along with the surgeon.
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                                                         Abstract and Keywords
          Background: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) can be performed by following either of
          the two approaches proposed by the American and the French school. The two approaches
          have comparable operative times, but use different arrangements for the patient’s and
          operators’ positions, and sites for port insertions.
          The aim of the present paper is to describe an alternative to the American and the French
          approaches, referred to as the Bangla technique, which uses a standard four port approach but
          requires the presence of only one assistant along with the surgeon. It is hoped that the Bangla
          technique will improve surgery outcomes for gallbladder disease patients and encourage
          healthcare professionals in resource-poor settings to adopt minimally invasive/laparoscopic
          approaches to surgical problems.
          Methods: The sample consisted of a total of 280 gallbladder disease retrospective
          observational cases (of which 21 were children between 6 and 16 of age) who were treated
          with the Bangla technique at the South Point Hospital Chittagong, Bangladesh, between
          January 2018 and February 2020.
          Results: Surgery data showed that using the Bangla technique, the average operating time
          and average operation theater time were36.25 and 45.9 minutes, respectively. Of the patients,
          86% left the hospital on the same day of operation, while the remaining left the following
          day. In 91.7% of the cases, there were no complications, while content leakage and bleeding
          occurred in 6.7% and 1.4% cases, respectively.
          Conclusion: The proposed LC technique will benefit infection prevention and control by
          reducing the number of personnel in the operation theatre (one assistant and the surgeon) and,
          as such, reducing surgery-related expenses, which can be further decreased by using only one
          monitor. More so, the Bangla technique can be combined with the cystic artery sparing
          technique to reduce the risk of injury to the common bile duct and bleeding.
          Keywords: gallbladder lithiasis, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, cystic artery sparing
          technique, Bangla technique

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                                                                Introduction
                    Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is the gold standard for the surgical treatment of
          gallbladder diseases. The laparoscopic technique can be performed by following either the
          American [1], or the French approach[2], which are different in terms of positioning of the
          patients, operators, and trocars. Selecting one technique over the other is usually related to
          the surgeon’s training and the operator’s habit, as opposed to evidence-based clinical
          indications[3].
                    In the American technique, the patient takes a supine position with closed legs while
          the surgeon places themselves on the patient’s left; one assistant holds the camera to the
          surgeon’s left, and another assistant places themselves on the patient’s right side. In the
          French approach, the surgeon stands between the spread legs of the patient and the two
          assistants are positioned to the patient’s left and to the right side of the surgeon.
                    The main difference between the two approaches is the port position. In the American
          approach, one 5 mm port is on the right side of patient at the level of umbilicus while in the
          French approach this is on the left of the patient’s midline, and above the transverse umbilical
          line. This difference implies that the traction of the assistant on the bottom of the gallbladder
          is not exerted from the same position in both techniques. In the American technique, the
          exertion of traction is done via the right lateral port, and in the French approach, via the
          epigastric port. The two techniques are similar in terms of the surgical tactics used for
          traction on the gallbladder, isolation of the elements before clip application, and exposure of
          the Calot’s triangle. The proponents of each method consider that some maneuvers are
          simpler in one approach compared to the other, or prefer repeating the same movements in
          similar phases of an intervention so as to reduce tissue trauma and errors, and to increase the
          execution speed[3].
                    While no studies indicate that one of the two methods provides a lower risk of biliary
          lesions or other major complications, Perissat [4] argues that the use of several traction
          modes for the gallbladder in the American approach may increase bile duct injury risks. More
          specifically, in the American technique the liver is retracted by axial traction on the
          gallbladder through the anterior axillary cannula and the infundibulum through the mid-
          clavicular cannula. In the French technique, on the other hand, the liver is retracted via the
          mid-clavicular cannula and the infundibulum of the gallbladder via the anterior axillary port.
          Moreover, one study showed that the French approach had a lower impact on postoperative
          lung function [5].
                    In a pooled data analysis and systematic review analyzing outcome trends and safety
          measures of LC as reported by 51 studies published in the last three decades, overall
          morbidity, bile leakage and bile duct injury (BDI), and mortality rates were 1.6-5.3%, 0.32-
          0.52%, and 0.08-0.14%, respectively [6]. BDI rates reported in 2010-2015 were lowered than
          those reported in1994-1999 (0.02-0.40% vs 0.52-0.84%, respectively). The meta-analysis
          indicated a higher conversion rate in developed countries compared to developing countries
          (4.7% vs 3.4%), although a reporting bias was found in the studies included.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                    A systematic review of BDI prevention [7] concluded that many studies have used
          low sample sizes and suboptimal study designs which makes it difficult to indicate whether
          one method is better compared to others to prevent BDI; however, the paper recommended
          that surgeons should mainly focus on techniques of proper dissection, of which the Critical
          View of Safety (CVS) approach[8, 9] is the most suitable. The CVS approach consists of a
          blunt dissection of the upper part of Calot’s space, which typically does not contain biliary or
          arterial anomalies and is, as such, is ideal for a safe dissection. The use of CVS is also
          recommended by the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
          (SAGES) [10].
                                                                   Methods
          Description of the Technique
                    The proposed approach, referred to as the Bangla technique, benefits infection
          prevention and control by reducing the number of personnel in the operation theatre (one
          assistant and the operating surgeon) and, as such, reducing surgery-related expenses—which
          are further reduced by using only one monitor.
                    A standard four-port procedure is used. The patient is kept in the supine position on
          the operating table. After anesthesia is administered (in most cases spinal anesthesia), the
          patient is restrained via a cloth belt at the level of the hips, which prevents them from falling.
          In our study, the spinal anesthesia consisted of 0.5% Bupivacaine in 8.5% dextrose at a dose
          of 0.4 mg/kg of body weight. CO2 insufflation pressures were kept under 8 mmHg and flow
          was maintained between 2.0-2.5 L/minute in children; 12 mmHg and 3.0-3.5 L/minute in
          adults. Patients also received sedation with intravenous diazepam or ketamine hydrochloride
          as an adjunct to alleviate their anxiety.
                    Ports (most often of 10 mm) are then inserted starting with the camera port at the
          upper or lower fold of the umbilicus. Three additional 5 mm ports are inserted: one in the
          epigastrium below the xiphisternum, one on the left side at a point on the midclavicular line
          between the umbilicus and the costal margin, and one on the right side at the level of the
          umbilicus. The Bangla position can be seen in Figures 1 and 2. Figures 3 and 4 shows how
          each port is placed on the patient.
                    The foot end of the operating table is lowered along with the patient’s lower limbs.
          The head end of the operating table is elevated by 25–35 degrees, and the right side of the
          patient is elevated by 15–20 degrees. The trolley, which includes the monitor, camera unit,
          light source, insufflator, and electro-surgical units, is placed toward the head end of the
          patient on the right side. The instrument trolley is kept toward the foot end of the table on the
          left side of the patient, between the surgeon and assistant.
                    The surgeon stands in front of the patient’s lower limbs and the assistant stands on the
          left side of the patient. The surgeon handles the instruments inserted through the left and right
          ports for the operative steps. The assistant holds the telescopes inserted through the umbilical
          port with their left hand and holds and pushes away the gall bladder upwards and to the right

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          by using their right hand and the instrument through the epigastric port. Once the gall bladder
          is freed, it is retrieved through the umbilical port (10 mm) using a reduction sleeve. The
          visualization during retrieval is realized via the port on the left side with a 5 mm telescope.
                    To reduce infection risks and complications, the Bangla technique can be combined
          with the cystic artery sparing technique [11], which allows avoiding handling and injury to
          the cystic artery and, consequently, ductal injuries. In this technique, dissection starts distal to
          the cystic lymph node on the gallbladder wall using a monopolar hook cautery or a
          combination of bipolar and monopolar cautery in many cases; as such, the cystic artery
          sparing technique does not touch the cystic artery while clearing the Calot’s. The average
          surgery time was 40 minutes and the surgery outcome data showed no immediate
          postoperative complications.
          Sampling and Statistical Analysis
                    The study was undertaken in South Point Hospital Chittagong, Bangladesh between
          1st January 2018 and 29th February 2020 (out of which 18 were partial LC cases [12, 13]).
          The sample consisted of a total of 280 retrospective observational cases who were treated
          with the Bangla technique. The sample included 21 children between 6 and 16 years of age
          diagnosed with the gallbladder stone disease and 259 adults up to 60 years of age diagnosed
          with the gallbladder stone disease, acalculous cholecystitis and gallbladder polyps. Patients of
          other ages, patients with severe heart disease and/or uncontrolled diabetes, and patients with
          gallbladder diseases where another physical condition made anesthesia contraindicated where
          excluded.
                    Ethical clearance was obtained from the Ethical Committee of South Point Hospital.
          Consent was obtained from all adult patients and the parent(s) or legal guardians of the minor
          patients. The study was conducted in accordance to the ethical principles for medical research
          involving human subjects as provided by the World Medical Association Declaration of
          Helsinki[14].
                                                                    Results
                    Descriptive statistics were obtained with the IBM Statistical Product and Service
          Solutions (SPSS) v.27[15]. Data analysis showed an average operating time of 36.25 minutes
          and an average operation theater time of 45.9 minutes. Of the patients, 86%left the hospital
          on the same day of operation, while the remaining left the following day. In 91.7% of the
          cases there were no complications, while content leakage occurred in 6.7% of the cases, and
          bleeding occurred in 1.4% of the cases.
                    There were no cases of CBD injury. In children, there were no cases of excessive
          adhesions of omentum, duodenum, stomach, or intestinal loops obscuring the Calot's triangle,
          which would make dissection difficult. Such events are not uncommon in adults; however,
          cystic artery sparing technique starts dissection relatively proximally on the gall bladder wall,
          and can locate the Calot’s triangle in a timely manner.
                    There was no case of open cholecystectomy in children. In adults, during the past 2
          years, only two adult cases required opening because of excessive adhesion of the duodenum

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          and stomach to the gall bladder wall, which posed a risk of injury during the use of dissection
          instruments. Table 1 provides the key statistics for each type of complication.
          Table 1. Number of cases, number of conversions, and number of partial laparoscopic
          cholecystectomy (LC) cases per complication type
          Complication type                    Number of cases              Number of conversions                 Partial
                                                                                                                LC cases
          No complications                 257                            2                                    4
          Content leaking                  19                             0                                    11
          Bleeding                         4                              0                                    3
          CBD injury                       0                              0                                    0
          Total                            280 (21 children and           2                                    18
                                           259 adults)
          LC= Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
                                                       Discussion and Conclusion
                    The present paper proposes an alternative to the American and the French approaches,
          referred to as the Bangla technique, which uses a standard four-port approach but requires the
          presence of only one assistant along with the surgeon. The American technique requires two
          assistants and one scrub nurse besides the surgeon. The French technique can be performed
          with one less assistant, while the Bangla technique eliminates the need for a scrub nurse in
          the operative team. Based on the evidence described, we argue that complications are not
          related to the technique (American/French/Bangla), but to the level of expertise of the
          surgeon and the inherent condition of the gall bladder and adjacent structures. On the other
          hand, the dissection technique used during the operation matters. As mentioned in an earlier
          section, the CVS and the cystic artery sparing technique described reduces complications and
          conversion to an open procedure.
                    All laparoscopic surgeries performed using the Bangla technique, including in
          children above 5 years of age, were conducted under spinal anesthesia. Regional anesthesia,
          such as spinal, epidural, and combined spinal-epidural anesthesia come with several
          advantages over general anesthesia, including an awake and spontaneously breathing patient
          intraoperatively, the prevention of airway manipulation, effective post-operative analgesia,
          minimal nausea and vomiting, and early ambulation and recovery; neverhteless, side effects
          such as ventilatory changes due to requirement of a higher sensory level, more severe
          hypotension, respiratory embarrassment caused by the pneumoperitoneum, and shoulder
          discomfort due to diaphragmatic irritation should also be considered[16]. On the other hand,
          in children, the hemodynamic response appears to be insignificant in the case of spinal
          anesthesia [17], or less significant than in general anesthesia[18]. More so, unlike what often
          happens during general anesthesia, ventilatory support for respiratory depression does not
          seem to be required, stress hormones are not released, and postoperative analgesia is not
          necessary. Spinal anesthesia also saves a considerable amount of operation theater time,
          about 15-30 minutes, as it obviates the need for induction and reversal of anesthesia[18].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                    Reducing the number of operative team personnel, as with the Bangla technique, will
          encourage healthcare professionals and administrators in resource-poor settings with
          shortages of skilled manpower to adopt minimally invasive/laparoscopic approaches to
          surgical problems. The Bangla technique combined with the cystic artery sparing technique,
          with spinal anesthesia use, provides a suitable option for a safe, cost-effective LC that poses
          lesser infection risks.
                    It is hoped that the Bangla technique will be implemented in more hospitals across
          Bangladesh and in other parts of Asia and the world, which will allow future studies to
          replicate the current study with a much larger sample; hence providing data with a high
          degree of validity and generalizability.
          Acknowledgements: None
          Disclosures: None
          References
          1.        Reddick, E.J., et al., Laparoscopic laser cholecystectomy. Laser Medicine and
                    Surgery News and Advances, 1989. 7(1): p. 38-40.
          2.        Dubois, F., G. Berthelot, and H. Levard, Cholecystectomy by coelioscopy. Presse
                    medicale (Paris, France: 1983), 1989. 18(19): p. 980.
          3.        Carlomagno, N., et al., Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: technical compromise between
                    French and American approach. Ann Ital Chir, 2014. 85: p. 93-100.
          4.        Perissat, J., Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: the European experience. The American
                    journal of surgery, 1993. 165(4): p. 444-449.
          5.        Kum, C.K., et al., Randomized comparison of pulmonary function after the
                    ‘French’and ‘American’techniques of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. British journal
                    of surgery, 1996. 83(7): p. 938-941.
          6.        Pucher, P.H., et al., Outcome trends and safety measures after 30 years of
                    laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a systematic review and pooled data analysis. Surgical
                    endoscopy, 2018. 32(5): p. 2175-2183.
          7.        van de Graaf, F.W., et al., Safe laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a systematic review of
                    bile duct injury prevention. International Journal of Surgery, 2018. 60: p. 164-172.
          8.        Strasberg, S.M. and L.M. Brunt, Rationale and use of the critical view of safety in
                    laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 2010.
                    211(1): p. 132-138.
          9.        Vettoretto, N., et al., Critical view of safety during laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
                    JSLS: Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, 2011. 15(3): p. 322.
          10.       Asbun, H.J., et al., The SAGES Manual of Biliary Surgery. 2020: Springer.
          11.       Hannan, M.J. and M.M. Hoque, Laparoscopic cholecystectomy without handling the
                    cystic artery: a new approach to minimize complications. Journal of
                    Laparoendoscopic & Advanced Surgical Techniques, 2011. 21(10): p. 983-986.
          12.       Henneman, D., et al., Laparoscopic partial cholecystectomy for the difficult
                    gallbladder: a systematic review. Surgical endoscopy, 2013. 27(2): p. 351-358.
          13.       Yoon, P.D., et al., Laparoscopic partial cholecystectomy: a way of getting out of
                    trouble. Int J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis, 2016. 6: p. 68-75.
          14.       Association, W.M., WMA declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for medical
                    research involving human subjects. Hämtad 6 maj 2020, från WMA. 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209056.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
          15.       Product, S., Service Solutions (SPSS). IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version,
                    2020. 27.
          16.       Bajwa, S.J.S. and A. Kulshrestha, Anaesthesia for laparoscopic surgery: General vs
                    regional anaesthesia. Journal of minimal access surgery, 2016. 12(1): p. 4.
          17.       Rukewe, A., T. Alonge, and A. Fatiregun, Spinal anesthesia in children: no longer an
                    anathema! Pediatric Anesthesia, 2010. 20(11): p. 1036-1039.
          18.       Uguralp, S., et al., Regional anesthesia is a good alternative to general anesthesia in
                    pediatric surgery: Experience in 1,554 children. Journal of pediatric surgery, 2002.
                    37(4): p. 610-613.
                                                              Figure Legends
          Figure 1. A patient places in the Bangla position before surgery
          Figure 2. The position of the surgeon, the assistant, the anesthetist, and the instrument
          trolley in the Bangla position
          Figure 3. The four ports used in the Bangla position: One at the upper fold of the
          umbilicus, one in the epigastrium, one on the left side at a point on the midclavicular
          line and one on the right side at the level of the umbilicus
          Figure 4. Ports inserted in a patient in the Bangla position




