medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Countering the potential re-emergence of a deadly infectious
   disease - information warfare, identifying strategic threats,
   launching countermeasures
   Rex N. Ali1,* , Harvey Rubin2 , Saswati Sarkar1
   1 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,
   Philadelphia, PA 19104
   2 Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
   * Corresponding author
   Email addresses: alirex@seas.upenn.edu (Rex N. Ali), rubinh@med.upenn.edu (Harvey
   Rubin), swati@seas.upenn.edu (Saswati Sarkar)
   Abstract
   Eradicated infectious diseases like smallpox can re-emerge through accident or designs of bioter-
   rorists, and perpetrate heavy casualties. Currently, only a small percentage of the populace is
   vaccinated, and their protection is likely to have waned. Most therefore are susceptible today.
   And when the disease re-emerges the susceptible individuals may be manipulated by disinforma-
   tion on Social Media to refuse vaccines. Thus, a combination of countermeasures consisting of
   antiviral drugs and vaccines and a range of policies for their application need to be investigated.
   Opinions as to receptivity of vaccines evolve with time through social exchanges over networks
   that overlap with but are not identical to the disease propagation networks. These couple the
   spread of the biological and information contagion and necessitate a joint investigation of the
   two. Towards these, we develop a computationally tractable metapopulation epidemiological
   model that captures the joint spatio-temporal evolution of smallpox and opinion dynamics.
   The computations based on the model show that opinion dynamics has a substantial impact
   on the fatality count. Towards understanding how perpetrators are likely to seed the infection
   we identify a) the initial distribution of infected individuals that maximize the overall fatality
   count regardless of mobility patterns, and b) which habitation structures are more vulnerable
   to outbreaks. We assess the relative efficacy of different countermeasures and conclude that a
   combination of vaccines and drugs minimizes the fatalities, and by itself, for smallpox, drugs
   reduce fatalities more than the vaccine. Accordingly, we assess the efficacies of three separate
   policies for administering the drugs and identify the best among them for various parameter
   combinations. When the availability of the drug is finite, we show that increase in its supply
   substantially     reduces
    NOTE: This preprint           theresearch
                        reports new     overall
                                              thatfatality.   Our
                                                   has not been      findings
                                                                certified by peer lead
                                                                                  reviewto
                                                                                        andpolicy   recommendations
                                                                                            should not                        for
                                                                                                       be used to guide clinical    pub-
                                                                                                                                 practice.
                                                                       1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   lic health and urban design authorities towards thwarting smallpox and other infectious disease
   outbreaks.
   Introduction
   The devastative potential of a sudden outbreak of an infectious disease is self-evident in this
   time of a pandemic. The havoc caused by the COVID-19 outbreak may not only be replicated
   but also amplified should an eradicated infectious disease re-emerge. While naturally occurring
   smallpox was eradicated in the 1970s through decades of a global vaccination campaign, it can
   re-emerge under various scenarios [14, 15, 20, 24]. Variola virus (smallpox virus) is a category A
   bioterrorism agent [2] and stocks of the virus are known to officially exist in two high-security
   biosafety level 4 laboratories in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
   and Russia (VECTOR Institute) and potentially elsewhere too [14, 15, 20, 24]. For instance, in
   2014, scientists at the National Institute of Health (NIH) discovered half-dozen forgotten vials
   of smallpox in a storage room on its campus in Bethesda, Maryland [5, 30]. In addition, a virus
   similar to Variola, horsepox, has recently been synthesized from genetic pieces ordered in the
   mail [28], and smallpox may be recreated using similar techniques.
        If smallpox does re-emerge, vaccine hesitancy - that is, refusing immunization on non-medical
   grounds (e.g., religious and philosophical beliefs, safety concern, disinformation) - can thwart
   attempts to proactively prevent it. Anti-vaccination movements also known as “Antivaxxers”
   have routinely propagated disinformation regarding immunization for various diseases e.g. that
   measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine causes autism [8, 29]. A recent survey has shown
   that respectively less than 25% and 50% individuals will opt for a COVID-19 vaccine within
   three months and a year of its launch [10]. Vaccine hesitancy caused a spike in measles outbreak
   in 2019 [7]. Consequently, the World Health Organization (WHO) added vaccine hesitancy to
   their list of top 10 threats to global health in 2019 [31]. Vaccine hesitancy will particularly
   damage the containment of future outbreaks of smallpox because only a small percentage of the
   current populace is vaccinated, and their protection is likely to have waned.
        Social media has fueled vaccine hesitancy by escalating disinformation on immunization,
   and in the event of an outbreak may enable malefactors who seed the disease to simultaneously
   amplify anti-vaccine campaigns and manipulate the target populace to refuse preventives. Also,
   in the age of social media, opinions regarding receptivity to vaccines rapidly evolve, through
                                                                    2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   social networks that overlap with but are not identical to biological networks. Specifically,
   during physical interactions, both diseases and opinions may spread, whereas only opinions may
   spread through remote (e.g., electronic) interactions. Finally, in some cases, only disease might
   spread because individuals share the same physical space (e.g., public spaces like beaches, parks,
   public transports) without exchanging ideas. Thus, spread of smallpox and opinion regarding
   receptivity of vaccines must be jointly investigated.
        Vaccine-hesitant individuals are likely to be more receptive towards receiving drugs. Be-
   sides, underlying medical conditions like immunocompromise contraindicate a section of the
   populace from receiving fast-acting live vaccines. Both vaccine-hesitant and immunodeficient
   (also known as immunocompromised) individuals can benefit from antiviral drugs (e.g., tecovir-
   imat (TPOXX) and cidofovir [3]) which may be used to both treat infected persons as well
   as prevent disease in those exposed. These are currently stockpiled in the Strategic National
   Stockpile for use if there is an outbreak of smallpox in the United States [3]. Drugs have an
   advantage in a public health setting because they can be administered without the intervention
   of a healthcare professional, e.g., TPOXX is taken orally twice daily [4]. The downside though
   is that they need to be taken for many days throughout the outbreak. Thus, considering the
   comparative advantages and disadvantages of drugs vis a vis vaccines, only a combination of
   countermeasures may be able to successfully counter smallpox should it emerge. One can envi-
   sion different policies for administering antiviral drugs: (a) Policy 1 – administer only to those
   who have rashes (b) Policy 2 – once the number of cases in a neighborhood exceeds a certain
   threshold, administer to anyone with fever or rashes in the neighborhood (c) Policy 3 – once
   the number of cases in a neighborhood exceeds a certain threshold, administer to everyone in
   the neighborhood. We therefore need a framework to assess application of a combination of
   countermeasure and multiple countermeasure application policies. Note that the supply of the
   countermeasures would be finite in practice, a constraint that ought to influence the design of
   smart countermeasures.
        Finally, geography, spatial distribution and mobility patterns of individuals is crucial in un-
   derstanding the spread of an infectious disease and the efficacy of countermeasures. Locations
   inhabited by the target population are comprised of different neighborhoods, some of which
   are adjacent, some geographically disparate. Connection between individuals in geographically
   close neighborhoods is expected to be more frequent than those between the disparate ones
   leading to heterogeneous interaction rates. Next, interactions often happen through mobility
                                                                    3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   which must follow geographical constraints. That is, when individuals move from one neighbor-
   hood to another, they pass through those in-between; thus mixing between two geographically
   disparate neighborhoods involves mixing with individuals in the neighborhoods in between. The
   effectiveness of the countermeasure may well be substantially enhanced by exploiting groupings
   of populations in distinct locales. And, the perpetrators of the attack may exploit the geography
   to strategically implant the initially infected individuals, following a spatial distribution that
   maximizes the spread of the disease.
        Mathematical modeling is an indispensable analytical tool that can help us to prepare for and
   respond to a smallpox incident. Several models have been constructed to understand the spread
   of smallpox and the efficacy of vaccination and quarantine as a response to contain the disease
   [14, 16, 18–20, 25, 27]. Note that immunocompetent individuals (that is, those with healthy
   immune systems) can be immunized by the live vaccine (ACAM2000) which provides immunity
   in a short time after administering if taken while they are susceptible (that is before they are
   infected) or in the early part of incubation (that is shortly after infection) [11,14]. On the other
   hand, the immunodeficient individuals can only be given the Modified Vaccinia virus Ankara
   (MVA) vaccine (Imvamune) [11,14,17], MVA takes two-shots 30 days apart to provide immunity
   [17]. Although approximately 20% of people in the United States are immunodeficient [1,21,25],
   the existing work largely does not consider the impact of the immunodeficient population. But,
   [20, 25] considered such persons in their model, assuming though that they are contraindicated
   from all vaccinations and excluded them from participating in vaccination altogether. However,
   [11, 14, 17] have shown that immunodeficient persons can receive the MVA vaccine but it will
   take a longer time to provide immunity. Only a few works have considered administering drugs,
   e.g., [14, 19]. Evolution of opinions, mobility, impact of geography, finite supply of drugs, have
   not been considered even in isolation in context of evolution of smallpox. None of the existing
   works naturally simultaneously modeled these, particularly in conjunction with combination of
   multiple countermeasures and different application strategies.
        Epidemiological investigation of other infectious diseases have considered spatial hetero-
   geneity in the spread [6, 9]. But these have not investigated questions particularly relevant for
   bioterrorist attacks, namely 1)which spatial distributions of the initially infected individuals
   maximize the spread of the disease 2) which topological connectivities of habitations enhance
   vulnerability to infectious epidemics. Simultaneous administering of multiple countermeasures,
   multiple policies for administering them and application constraints have not been considered
                                                                    4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   in models for other infectious diseases either. Last, but perhaps the most important, the joint
   spread of disease and opinion dynamics and the impact of one on the other remain an unchar-
   tered territory in the modeling of infectious diseases. Such opinion dynamics, encompassing
   receptivity to vaccine once developed and wearing protective gears like masks, is expected to
   strongly influence the evolution of many infectious diseases, including COVID-19, in the current
   age.
        Our contributions are as follows. We develop a computationally tractable mathematical
   model that jointly captures the evolution of a smallpox incident and opinion dynamics over time
   and space and the impact of various combinations of spatial topologies, mobility rates, coun-
   termeasures, and strategies for their applications. The model captures the essence of stochastic
   evolution, while retaining computational tractability, and therefore easily scales to typical tar-
   get population sizes for infectious diseases encompassing millions of individuals. Note that a
   Monte Carlo simulation relying on an agent based stochastic simulation will not scale to that
   magnitude. We utilize the model to quantify the impact of the opinion dynamics, different
   countermeasures and application strategies, topologies and mobility patterns on metrics that
   capture the overall health of the system such as total number of fatalities, and visits to health-
   care facilities.
        Our findings lead to several policy recommendations for public health authorities: 1) We
   show that opinion dynamics has a substantial impact on the fatality count in the settings
   in which vaccines are administered. Thus public health authorities must seek to incentivize
   the spread of opinions favorable towards reception of vaccines over social and other media. 2)
   They must anticipate that bioterrorist attacks will distribute the initially infected individuals to
   maximize the fatalities. We identify such worst case distributions in this paper. 3) They should
   influence new urban designs to render them less sensitive to the spread of infectious diseases
   and monitor existing habitations that have specifically vulnerable topological distributions for
   outbreaks. We identify which habitation structures are more vulnerable to bioterrorist attacks.
   4) We assess the relative efficacy of different countermeasures and conclude that a combination
   of vaccines and antiviral drugs is the most effective in reducing the fatalities, but if one must
   choose one countermeasure, in this particular case, it ought to be the drugs. Accordingly, we
   assess the efficacies of three separate policies for administering the drugs and identify the most
   effective one for various parameter combinations. We show that when the availability of the
   drug is finite, increase in its supply substantially reduces overall fatality. Thus public health
                                                                    5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   authorities should stock adequate amounts of antiviral drugs to contain future outbreaks and
   choose policies for administering them in accordance with their available supply. Finally, we
   expect that our model would easily port to other infectious diseases such as COVID-19 through
   the consideration of a different set of disease states and parameters.
   Methods
   Developing the model - state transition formulations
   Infectious diseases evolve in different stages, different stages show different symptoms and the
   initial stages need not show any symptom. In smallpox, individuals move from susceptible to
   early incubation to late incubation to prodrome to early then late rash. From late rash, patients
   either recover or die. Different stages have different durations. The incubation phase typically
   lasts 8 to 17 days and does not have any symptoms. The prodromal phase begins at the onset of
   the first symptoms (fever, chills, headache) and lasts for 3 days on average. The early and late
   rash periods last for 3 and 7 days respectively [14]. We use susceptibles, incubators, prodromals
   to denote the individuals in susceptible, incubation and prodrome stages respectively. Patients
   can infect susceptible individuals in the prodrome, early and late rash stages. Thus, note that
   even when patients do not show symptoms they can infect others.
        Efficacy of countermeasures depends upon the stage in which they are administered. Vac-
   cines prevent the onset of smallpox with certain probabilities if administered prior to the late
   incubation stage. Live vaccines (ACAM2000) provide immediate immunity during this period.
   Immunodeficient individuals are contraindicated for receiving the live vaccine, rather they are
   administered the MVA vaccine (Imvamune) [11, 14, 17]. MVA takes two-shots 30 days apart to
   provide immunity [17]. Antiviral drugs like tecovirimat (TPOXX) and cidofovir [3] are generally
   administered to infected persons for treatment and can be used for prevention.
        The application of countermeasures introduces additional states, namely preempted. Indi-
   viduals enter the preempted state after developing immunity owing to the reception of vaccines.
   Antiviral drugs preempt smallpox, so individuals also enter this state if they are administered
   the drug. We assume that once individuals without symptoms are administered this drug, to
   prevent the onset of smallpox even after possible exposure, they continue to receive the drug
   until the disease is completely contained. Thus, preemption is permanent, and the preemption
   state is an absorbing state, i.e., individuals can only enter this state, not leave it.
                                                                    6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        We now describe the state transitions, progressively considering the following scenarios: (1)
   No countermeasure - neither drugs nor vaccines administered, (2) Vaccines only, (3) Drugs only,
   (4) Both drugs and vaccines.
   No countermeasure
   We first consider the case that all individuals are in the same neighborhood, that is, they interact
   with each other at the same rate (homogeneous mixing). Each individual is either immuno-
   competent or immunodeficient. Individuals in either category may be in one of the following
   states: susceptible, early incubation, late incubation, prodrome, early rash, late rash, recovered,
   dead. Fig 1 depicts the state transitions pictorially. There are two kinds of transitions: (1)
   interactional and (2) non-interactional. The first kind of transition occurs as a result of physical
   interactions in which the biological contagion spreads, that is, when two individuals are in close
   proximity and one is susceptible while the other is infected (that is in one of the following states
   prodrome, early rash, late rash), then the susceptible is infected with a certain probability and
   transitions to early incubation stage. The second kind of transition occurs as a result of the
   natural evolution of the disease in infected individuals. For instance, the disease transition from
   early incubation to late incubation and from late incubation to prodrome after about 7 and 5
   days respectively. From the late rash state, the immunocompetent individuals either transition
   to the recovered or to the dead state, while immunodeficient individuals invariably die [13].
                                                                    7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Fig 1: Smallpox disease progression overview when no countermeasure is imple-
   mented. The symbol S denotes susceptible, A and B denote early and late incubation respec-
   tively, P denotes Prodrome, C and E denote early and late rash respectively, R denotes recovered
   and D denotes dead. The suffix h denotes immunocompetency, and c denotes immunodeficiency
   e.g., Sh , Sc respectively denote immunocompetent and immunodeficient susceptible, etc. Table
   6 in Appendix A.1 contains all the relevant abbreviations we used to represent each state. The
   states in blue color are the susceptibles (not yet infected but they are prone to infection) while
   those in light green color are still in incubation period, hence they are not infectious. The
   states in dark red are infectious while those in gold have recovered and black denotes dead.
   In addition, the yellow arrows show interactional changes, namely susceptibles transitioning to
   the incubation state after contracting the virus from infectious individuals. The blue arrows
   indicate a non-interactional change, namely the natural progression of the disease.
   Drug only
   The state transitions for the drug only scenario is similar to that of the no countermeasure
   scenario. The most important distinction here is that the disease may be preempted with the
   drug. More specifically, if an individual is administered the drug before he is infected he does
   not develop the disease while he is given the drug. If an individual is administered the drug
   after he is infected, he is cured of the disease with a probability that depends on the stage of
   the disease in which he receives the drug. We, therefore, introduce a state called Preempted,
   which we denote by Q, into which individuals receiving the drug transition to with the specified
   probability. Once an individual transition to this state, he remains in it (since he is either cured
   or does not develop the disease) - thus, this is an absorbing state. Transition to this state is
   non-interactional as it is induced through the consumption of drugs rather than an interaction
   with another individual. The state transition for the drug only scenario is depicted pictorially
   in Fig 2.
                                                                    8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Fig 2: Smallpox disease progression overview for drug only scenario. The state in
   orange color denotes the preempted state. The red arrows denote preemption via drugs. Every
   other state and transition has the same meaning as described in the caption for Fig 1.
   Vaccine only
   The individuals who receive vaccine transition to the preempted state, after developing perma-
   nent immunity to the infectious disease. But, some individuals may not be willing to receive
   vaccines. We refer to those willing to receive vaccine as cooperative, and the rest as non-
   cooperative. Opinion regarding cooperation evolves with interactions with other individuals.
   Thus, this scenario needs to model both opinion and disease dynamics and the two are coupled.
   Thus, the state space needs also to be enriched to consider opinions and their evolutions. Fi-
   nally, one also needs to distinguish between immunocompetent and immunodeficient individuals
   because the latter can receive vaccines that act only very slowly regardless of their willingness
   to do so, and may not recover from a serious infectious disease [13].
        Interactions can be of the following kinds: (a) physical interactions with an exchange of
   information and biological contagion (e.g., friends and acquaintances visiting homes of each
   other), (b) physical interactions without any exchange of ideas (e.g., people commuting on
   a bus, train, etc.) (c) virtual interactions with an exchange of ideas (e.g., a health worker
   counseling a susceptible individual over the phone or internet). (a) can cause infection and
   change in opinion, (b) can cause only infection, (c) can cause only change of opinion. All the
   above represent interactional transitions in this case in which both disease and opinions spread
   through interactions. Fig 3 depicts the state transitions of this scenario pictorially. Here we only
   consider the case that the cooperatives persuade the non-cooperatives to become cooperatives
   during opinion exchange, but in practice the opinion exchange may change opinions in the
                                                                    9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   reverse direction too. In the next subsection we discuss how opinion changes in the reverse
   direction may be accommodated through minor modifications.
   Fig 3: Smallpox disease progression overview for vaccine only scenario. Building on
   the definitions of states in Fig 1, the suffixes a and b respectively denote willingness to receive
   vaccine and otherwise e.g., Sah , Sac respectively denote immunocompetent and immunodeficient
   susceptibles that are willing to vaccinate. Similarly, Sbh , Sbc respectively denote immunocom-
   petent and immunodeficient susceptibles that are not willing to vaccinate. Table 9 in Appendix
   A.3 contains all the relevant abbreviations in this scenario. The states in blue color are the
   susceptibles (not yet infected but they are prone to infection) while those in light green color
   are still in incubation period, hence they are not infectious. The states in dark red are infected
   and therefore infectious while those in gold have recovered, those in yellow are immunized, and
   black denotes dead. In addition, the yellow arrows show susceptibles transitioning to the in-
   cubation state after contracting the virus. The blue arrows indicate the natural progression of
   the disease. The red arrows denote preemption via vaccination while the black arrows indicate
   opinion evolution.
        Referring to the above state transitions, we need to consider four different outcomes for
   interaction between individuals:
     (a) Neither of the individuals gets infected or changes their opinion after the interaction. For
           instance, let a cooperative susceptible, Sah , interact with a cooperative early incubator
           say Aah . This interaction does not lead to infection neither does it lead to a change in
           opinion about immunization.
                                                                   10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     (b) Neither of the individuals gets infected, but one (and only one) changes his opinion, e.g.,
           a cooperative susceptible, Sah , interacts with a non-cooperative early incubator, Abh .
           The susceptible does not contract the infection but the early incubator might change his
           opinion to become Aah .
     (c) One of the individuals gets infected, but neither changes his opinion. This happens for ex-
           ample in a physical interaction between a susceptible (e.g., Sbc ) and an infected individual
           (e.g., Pbc ) both of whom share the same opinion.
     (d) One of the individuals gets infected, and the other changes his opinion. This happens
           for example in a physical interaction between a susceptible (e.g., Sbc ) and an infected
           individual (e.g., Pah ) who have different opinions (Sbc may become Sac after the exchange).
   Both drugs and vaccines
   An individual may be preempted by receiving either the drug or the vaccine. The preempted
   states are Qa or Qb respectively representing preempted cooperative and non-cooperative indi-
   viduals. An individual can reach Qa by receiving either drugs or vaccines, while he can reach Qb
   only by receiving drug. The state transition in this case may be obtained by combining those
   of the drug only and vaccine only scenarios - more specifically, by adding to the vaccine-only
   scenario, the transitions to the preempted state induced by delivery of drugs. Refer to Fig 4
   for the state transitions. Note that in this figure, we assume that during opinion exchange
   cooperatives convert non-cooperatives. To accommodate persuasion in the opposite direction,
   one simply needs to invert the state transition directions corresponding to opinion exchange,
   namely the directions of the black arrows.
                                                                   11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Fig 4: Smallpox disease progression overview for both drug and vaccine scenario.
   The states colored orange are the preempted states. Every other state and transition has the
   same meaning as described in the caption for Fig 3.
   Capturing the impact of spatial heterogeneity
   We divide the target geographical area into smaller regions, referred to as clusters, such that the
   constituent regions are reasonably spatially homogeneous, that is, individuals inhabiting that
   region interact with each other at similar rate. The clusters can for example be neighborhoods
   of a city. The target geographical region can be a city, a county, a state, or even a country.
   People within the same cluster have high contact rates between themselves, while those living
   in different clusters have fewer contacts. In other words, intra-cluster interactions are higher
   compare to inter-cluster interactions.
        So far, an individual has been characterized by his cooperativity, stage of the disease, pre-
   emption, immunocompetency or immunodeficiency. Now, he is also identified by the cluster
   he inhabits. Thus, the cluster becomes part of his state description, which also changes as he
   moves between the clusters.
        To capture the geography of the region and the mobility rates of the individuals between
   the clusters, we represent every cluster as a node on a graph. Now, the mobility rates across
                                                                   12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the clusters may be represented through a mobility rate matrix on the graph. The mobility rate
   matrix is a matrix with rows and columns labeled by the cluster numbers, and whose i, j th
   entry represents the mobility rate, κi,j , of individuals in cluster i to cluster j. Here, κi,j = 0 if
   it is not possible to move directly from i to j (e.g., if these are not geographically adjacent or
   if traffic rules do not permit vehicular mobility from i to j). If it is possible to move from i to
   j, then κi,j represents the probability that an individual goes to cluster j when he decides to
   move out of cluster i divided by the expected time he spends in cluster i.
        We have pictorially represented some cluster decompositions in Fig 5. The central node
   in Fig 5a for example represents the downtown of a city, and the other nodes represent the
   neighborhoods surrounding it. Fig 5b depicts the cluster decomposition of a commercial and
   business district located at the edge of a river, sea or ocean.
                                                                                        (b) Linear topology
                        (a) Star topology
                                             Fig 5: Two example topologies.
        We use matrices to specify physical and virtual contact rates within and across clusters.
   Individuals in cluster i get in physical proximity of another in cluster j at a certain rate, the
   rate is much higher if i = j, than when i 6= j. Only a fraction of these contacts spread
   the disease. We consider that disease spread rate φi,j is the product of the rate at which an
   individual in cluster i gets in physical contact with another in cluster j and fraction of contacts
   between susceptibles and infectious individuals that spread the disease to the susceptibles. Rate
   of an event is the expected duration between successive occurrences of the event. Typically, φi,i
   would be much higher than φi,j for all i 6= j. Analogously, opinion spread rate αi,j is the product
   of the rate at which an individual in cluster i exchanges opinions with another in cluster j and
   fraction of such exchanges that change cooperativity.
   The Clustered Epidemiological Differential Equation (CEDE) model
   A joint investigation of infectious disease and opinion dynamics in presence of spatial hetero-
   geneity inevitably leads to a computationally complex model with 1) a multiplicity of states
                                                                   13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   representing a combination of stages of the disease, immunocompetency, and cooperativity, and
   2) a multiplicity of state transitions representing interactional transitions due to spread of the
   disease and opinions, non-interactional transitions due to mobility of individuals and the natural
   progression of the disease in infected individuals. We model these by adapting the metapopula-
   tion epidemiological model [6, 9, 12, 23] which relies on a set of differential equations (co-authors
   of this work have utilized the metapopulation model as well [12, 23]). Metapopulation models
   have some distinct advantages in modeling the spread of infectious diseases. In general, estimat-
   ing the spread of infectious diseases is computationally challenging because it involves millions
   of individuals in habitation sizes one needs to consider. Metapopulation models alleviate this
   challenge by relying on differential equations, which constitute computationally simple tools and
   can be solved using readily available numerical techniques. The differential equations capture
   the evolution of states of different fractions of the total population. Thus, the computational
   time does not increase with the increase in the size of the populace.
        Metapopulation models have however thus far not captured the transitions due to spread
   of both disease and opinions and application of various countermeasures. We have been able
   to adapt the metapopulation model to capture these attributes, we describe the adaptations in
   Appendix A and refer to the resulting model as clustered epidemiological differential equations
   or the CEDE, given that our target area is spatially decomposed in subregions referred to as
   clusters.
        We briefly describe the CEDE here. Each variable in the CEDE represents the fraction of
   the population who are in a particular system state, each state representing the combination
   of the cluster inhabited, the stage of the disease, immunocompetency, and cooperativity. Each
   differential equation captures the evolution of a particular variable. Thus, the solution of the
   system of differential equations provides the fraction of individuals in different states at given
   times, that is, the spatio-temporal distribution of the disease and opinion spread. The terms
   in the differential equations are either quadratic or linear. The quadratic ones represent the
   interactional transitions (refer to the yellow arrows in Figs 1 - 4 and the black arrows in Figs 3
   and 4) and the linear ones represent the non-interactional transitions (refer to the blue arrows in
   Figs 1 - 4). Note that interactions always involve two individuals, hence interactional transitions
   are represented by quadratic terms; in contrast, the non-interactional transitions involve only
   one individual and are therefore represented by linear terms. This is typical of epidemiological
   models starting from the classical Kermack–McKendrick formulation [22]) and onward to the
                                                                   14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   metapopulation models [6, 9, 12, 23]. Our work differs from the metapopulation epidemiological
   models in that it has additional quadratic terms representing the interactional transitions due to
   the spread of opinions, and additional linear terms representing preemption due to application
   of countermeasures.
        We now provide more details on the computation time of the CEDE. Let there be n clusters.
   Then there are 29 x n system states in the most complex CEDE we propose, that is for the
   scenario in which both vaccines and drugs are administered (Appendix A.4). In this scenario,
   there are 29n differential equations and 29n variables. Thus, the computation time increases
   with the increase in the number of clusters and system states, but the rate of increase is linear
   in each of these. Thus, the computation time gracefully scales with the increase of the size of
   the system.
        The CEDE is however a deterministic model, while many of the state transitions are stochas-
   tic. Nevertheless, through an application of the strong law of large numbers, under some com-
   monly made regularity assumptions on the stochastic evolutions, one can show that as the
   number of individuals increases, the fractions of individuals in different system states in the
   stochastic system converge to the solutions of the CEDE, and the convergence becomes exact
   in the limit that the number of individuals is infinity. For the mathematical proof we refer to
   a recent work by one of the co-authors involving the application of the CEDE in a different
   domain [23]. Thus the CEDE approximates the stochastic process better as the number of in-
   dividuals increase. The commonly made regulatory assumptions under which the convergence
   guarantees hold are that the stochastic evolutions are Markov, that is, the amount of time an
   individual spends in each system state is exponentially distributed, which is what we assume to
   estimate the parameters of the system.
        The generality of the model is another important strength - it can accommodate information
   dynamics, arbitrary topologies, mobility patterns, countermeasure combinations, countermea-
   sure application strategies and constraints (e.g., finite or infinite supply). Despite this generality,
   our model is computationally tractable and provides analytical convergence guarantees.
        Finally, the model can be easily modified to accommodate diseases such as COVID-19 that
   spreads through contact through appropriate selection of states and parameters.
                                                                   15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Results
   We utilized our model to obtain insights on the impact of (1) opinion dynamics as to receptivity
   to vaccine (2) the spatial distribution of the initially infected (3) various countermeasures (4)
   geography and (5) policies for administering the countermeasures on public health metrics. We
   mostly consider the total number of fatalities as the public health metric, but also in some cases
   assess the number of visits to health care facilities.
        We define the fraction of individuals who are willing to vaccinate at the initial time as initial
   cooperativity. Unless otherwise stated, we use the following values of the parameters: (1) initial
   cooperativity is 0.80 (2) the number of individuals who are initially infected is 10, 000 (3) supply
   of drug is infinite (4) total population per cluster is 10 million. The rest of the parameters are
   chosen as in Appendix B. Unless otherwise stated, we use policy 1 for administering drugs, that
   is, drugs are administered to patients with rash. When we consider multiple clusters, we will
   consider the star and linear topology shown in Figs 5a and 5b. We consider that if clusters
   i, j are not adjacent in these topologies, the mobility rate κi,j = 0 and if they are adjacent
   κi,j = κ, where κ = 0.01 unless otherwise stated. For example, in Fig 5a, clusters 1, 2 are
   adjacent, while 2, 3 are not adjacent. Similarly, in Fig 5b, clusters 1, 2 are adjacent, while 1, 3
   are not adjacent. We now consider the disease spread rate φi,j . We assume φi,j = 0 if i 6= j,
   that is, there is no direct physical contact and therefore no direct spread of disease between
   people inhabiting different clusters. We refer to φi,i as φ. Unless otherwise mentioned, we
   consider φ = 0.00173, corresponding to R0 = 6.9, the standard estimate used for smallpox. We
   discuss how we obtain φ from the above value of R0 in Appendix B.1. We next consider the
   opinion spread rate, αi,j . We assume that αi,j = 0 if i 6= j, that is individuals in different
   clusters do not directly exchange opinions. We consider that for all clusters i, αi,i = α, and
   assess the system for different values of α, chosen from a range, rather than opting for only one
   estimated value. For simplicity, we will refer to α as the opinion spread rate henceforth. We will
   consider two different scenarios in our computation: 1) cooperatives convert non-cooperatives
   during opinion exchange (default case in our computations) and 2) non-cooperatives convert
   cooperatives during opinion exchange (when explicitly stated).
                                                                   16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Opinion dynamics has a strong impact on fatality rates
   (a) Number of individuals infected at the initial (b) Number of individuals infected at the initial
   time is 1,000                                                     time is 10,000
       Fig 6: Relationship between fatality and opinion spread rate (single cluster).
   Our numerical computations in this section show that opinion dynamics have a strong impact
   on the fatality for the cases in which vaccines are used as a countermeasure, namely the “vaccine
   only” and “both vaccine and drug” scenarios. We consider two cases separately: 1) cooperatives
   converting non-cooperatives (Figs 6 and 7) and 2) non-cooperatives converting cooperatives
   (Figs 8 and 9) during interactions. In the two cases above, the cooperatives (non-cooperatives,
   respectively) convert the non-cooperatives (cooperatives, respectively) during their interactions
   at the rate α, thus, as α increases from 0 to 1, more (less, respectively) people become willing
   to receive vaccines, fatality in the “vaccine only” and “both vaccine and drug only” scenarios
   decrease (increase, respectively).
        We start with the case that cooperatives convert non-cooperatives during interactions. Fig
   6 plots the fatalities in the single cluster case in all four scenarios as a function of α in the
   range [0, 1]. With 1000 (10000, respectively) individuals initially infected, fatality for both drug
   and vaccine scenario decrease by 38.3% (30.7%, respectively) as α increases from 0 to 1. The
   fatality for the vaccine only scenario respectively decreases by 32.2% and 28.2% in these two
   cases. The fatality for no countermeasure and drug only scenarios does not change with any
   change in α.
                                                                   17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                        (a) Star topology                                                (b) Linear topology
    Fig 7: Relationship between fatality and opinion spread rate (multiple clusters).
        We now consider multiple clusters for the case that cooperatives convert non-cooperatives
   during interactions. Fig 7 plots the total fatality for both drug and vaccine scenario as a
   function of α in the range [0, 1]. We consider three distributions of initially infected individuals
   across the clusters: (1) uniform distribution across clusters (2) concentration in the central
   cluster (clusters 1 and 3 respectively in the star and linear topologies) and (3) concentration
   in a peripheral cluster (clusters 2 and 1 respectively in the star and linear topologies). As α
   increases from 0 to 1 in the star topology, total fatality decreases by 29.4%, 66.8%, and 54.2%
   respectively in the 3 scenarios. Similarly, as α increases from 0 to 1 in a linear topology, total
   fatality decreases by 29.3%, 63.7%, and 52.4% respectively in the 3 scenarios. Therefore, the
   decrease in total fatality is considerable in all cases and comparable across the two topologies.
                                                                   18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                           (a) Single cluster
                         (b) Star topology                                              (c) Linear topology
   Fig 8: Relationship between fatality and opinion spread rate when non-cooperatives
   convert cooperatives.
        We now consider the case that non-cooperatives convert cooperatives during interactions.
   We report the results for the scenario in which both vaccines and drugs are administered for
   α in the range [0, 1] and for a single cluster, multiple clusters with star and linear topologies
   (Figs 8 and 9). As expected, with increase in α, fatality increases. Fig 8a shows that, in a
   single cluster, as α increases from 0 to 1, fatality increases by 8.96% and 10.10% respectively
   when initial number of infected individuals are 1, 000 and 10, 000 respectively. Furthermore, as
   α increases from 0 to 1 in the star topology, fatality increases by 10.45%, 9.57%, and 9.79%
   respectively for the 3 distributions of the initially infected enumerated in the previous paragraph
   (Fig 8b). Similarly, as α increases from 0 to 1 in the linear topology, fatality increase by 10.47%,
   9.63%, and 9.83% respectively for the 3 distributions (Fig 8c). The magnitude of the change
                                                                   19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   is relatively low with increase in α as the initial cooperativity is 0.8, so the cooperatives do
   not have very many non-cooperatives to convert. The magnitude of the change increases for
   lower values of initial cooperativity (Fig 9). For example, when the initial cooperativity is
   0.5, Fig 9a shows that in a single cluster, as α increases from 0 to 1, fatality increases by
   27.69% and 30.53% respectively when initial number of infected individuals are 1, 000 and
   10, 000 respectively. Furthermore, as α increases from 0 to 1 in the star topology for the case
   where non-cooperatives convert cooperatives during interactions, fatality increase by 31.34%,
   30.01%, and 30.35% respectively for the 3 distributions of the initially infected individuals (Fig
   9b). Similarly, as α increases from 0 to 1 in the linear topology, fatality increases by 31.40%,
   30.11%, and 30.40% respectively for the 3 distributions (Fig 9c).
                                                           (a) Single cluster
                         (b) Star topology                                              (c) Linear topology
   Fig 9: Relationship between fatality and opinion spread rate when non-cooperatives
   convert cooperatives (initial cooperativity = 0.5).
                                                                   20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Distribution of initial infection and mobility of individuals have a significant
   impact
   The outbreak of an infectious disease may start from a single cluster or multiple clusters. It
   is of interest to find out if fatality is higher in one of these scenarios and if the difference is
   significant. This would help identify how the attacks might have been designed. We also seek
   to understand how enhanced mobility of individuals affects fatalities.
        We consider that both drugs and vaccines are used and plot the total fatality count across
   linear and star topologies as a function of the preemption rate. The preemption rate is the
   product of the reciprocal of the expected delay in developing immunity and the probability that
   the vaccine or drug provides immunity at the stage of the disease the individual is in. The
   delay is incurred in administering the vaccine or drug to the individuals (e.g., delay incurred in
   getting the health worker’s appointment), there is also a delay in developing immunity after the
   vaccine or the drug is administered. The basic preemption rates in different states have been
   calculated in Appendix B. We consider a preemption scale factor that multiplies all these rates,
   that is, scales the rates, we plot the fatality count as a function of this scale factor (Figure 10).
        For each topology we consider the following two scenarios:
       1. Initial infections are uniformly distributed across the clusters.
       2. Concentration of initial infections in a few clusters (either a central or a peripheral cluster).
                        (a) Star topology                                                (b) Linear topology
                  Fig 10: Relationship between fatality and rate of preemption.
        Fig 10 reveals the following. Other things being equal, the fatalities are much higher when
   initial infections are uniformly distributed across the clusters than when all the initial infections
                                                                   21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   originate from one cluster. For instance, if the preemption rate is equal to 1.6 in the star topology
   (see Fig 10a), then fatality when the initial infections are uniformly distributed would be 2.04
   and 2.84 times the fatality when the initial infections occur only in cluster 1 and only in cluster
   2 respectively. In addition, if the initial infections occur in one cluster, the fatalities are highest
   if the infections originate from the center. For instance, if the preemption rate in the linear
   topology (see Fig 10b) is equal to 0, then fatality when the initial infections originate from
   cluster 3 (central cluster) would be 1.49 times the fatality when the initial infections occur in
   cluster 1 (a peripheral cluster) only. Hence, given the same number of initial infections, the
   fatalities are the highest if initial infections are uniformly distributed across all the clusters and
   least when the initial infections originate from a peripheral cluster.
        Fig 10 also shows that increasing the preemption rate substantially decreases the fatality
   regardless of the distribution of the initial infection. Preemption rate may be increased by
   decreasing the delay in administering the vaccine and delivering the drug to the individuals
   which may be accomplished by increasing the number of health workers and the rate of delivery
   of the vaccine and drugs to the health facilities.
        We now plot the fatality count as a function of the mobility rates in the star and linear
   topologies in Figs 11a and 11b.
                        (a) Star topology                                                (b) Linear topology
                        Fig 11: Relationship between fatality and mobility rate.
        We observe the following. If the initial infections are uniformly distributed across the clus-
   ters, then fatality count does not change with the mobility rate, assuming that the mobility
   rates between two clusters are the same in both directions. If the initial infections occur only in
   one cluster, fatality substantially increases with the mobility rate. For instance, as the mobility
                                                                   22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   rate increases from 0 to 1 in the star topology (Fig 11a), the total fatality increase by 202.6%
   (from 27, 807 to 84, 136) if the initial infections originate from the central cluster only. Simi-
   larly, the total fatality increases by 166.5% (from 27, 807 to 74, 112) when the initial infections
   originate from a peripheral cluster.
        These observations may be explained as follows. Mobility helps individuals in different
   clusters mix with each other. Thus, if the initial infection is concentrated in a few clusters,
   higher mobility rates help spread the disease faster into other clusters and lead to high fatalities.
   This is the scientific basis for reducing travel links (land or air) between different regions when
   the infection is localized. But if the initial infection is spread out uniformly, the disease spreads
   in each region from the individuals initially infected even without any mobility. Thus mobility
   enhances the spread only marginally and thereby increases the fatality only marginally. Thus
   spatial quarantining strategies do not help much if the initial infection is uniformly spread.
   Thus, the uniform spread of initial infection constitutes the most deadly form of a deliberate
   attack.
        We also note that regardless of the mobility rate, fatality is significantly higher when the
   initial infection is uniformly spread as compared to when the initial infection is concentrated in
   a few clusters. For instance, when the mobility rate is 0, the total fatality when initial infections
   are uniformly distributed across the linear topology would be 11.4 times the fatality that occurs
   if infections originate from one cluster (Fig 11b). When the mobility rate becomes 1, the total
   fatality for the uniformly distributed initial infections would be 1.9 times the fatality that occurs
   if initial infections occur in cluster 1 only.
   Administering drugs substantially reduces fatality
   We show that using drugs as a countermeasure against smallpox substantially reduces fatality
   for various choices of parameter values, considering both unlimited (Figs 12 and 13) and limited
   (Fig 14) availability of drugs.
                                                                   23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Infinite drug availability
   (a) Relationship between fatality and disease (b) Relationship between fatality and initial coop-
   spread rate                                                       erativity
   Fig 12: Fatalities under four countermeasure application scenarios for various values
   of infection spread rates and initial cooperativities for single cluster.
   First, Fig 12a plots fatality as a function of disease spread rate, φ for the four scenarios for
   one cluster. Visually, we note that for the entire range of φ considered, the scenarios that
   involve administering of the drug, namely the “drug only” and “both” scenarios, have much
   lower fatality than those that do not involve administering of drugs, namely the “vaccine only”
   and “no countermeasure” scenarios. Specifically, at φ = 0.00173 (which corresponds to the
   standard value of R0 for smallpox as noted in Appendix B.1), the fatality for the “vaccine
   only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios are respectively 17.5 and 66.9 times that of the “drug
   only” scenario. Also, fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios are
   respectively 67.6 and 257.8 times that of the “both vaccine and drug” scenario. And fatality
   of the “drug only” scenario is 3.8 times that for the “both” scenario. Thus, deploying both
   countermeasures substantially reduce fatality, but if only one countermeasure is to be deployed,
   the drug is a better option in terms of fatality. This is because the non-cooperatives consent to
   the reception of the drug but not to the vaccine and the immunodeficient ones can only receive
   vaccines that act very slowly.
        In addition, Fig 12b plots fatality as a function of the initial cooperativity. The conclu-
   sions with respect to efficacy of the drug remain the same as in the previous paragraph. For
   example, when the initial cooperativity is 0.8, then the fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no
   countermeasure” scenarios are respectively 27.3 and 66.9 times that of the “drug only” scenario.
                                                                   24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Also, fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios are respectively 67.3
   and 164.5 times that of the “both vaccine and drug” scenario. And fatality of the “drug only”
   scenario is 2.5 times that for the “both” scenario.
   (a) Relationship between total fatality and disease (b) Relationship between total fatality and initial
   spread rate (star topology)                                       cooperativity (linear topology)
   Fig 13: Fatalities under four countermeasure application scenarios for various values
   of infection spread rates and initial cooperativities for multiple clusters.
        We now consider the multiple cluster case. Fig 13a plots total fatality as a function of
   disease spread while Fig 13b plots total fatality as a function of the initial cooperativity. The
   patterns are similar to what we reported in the previous paragraphs. For example, when the
   initial cooperativity is 0.8, for the star topology, from Fig 13a, the fatality for the “vaccine
   only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios are respectively 18.5 and 66.86 times that of the
   “drug only” scenario. Also, fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios
   are respectively 66.91 and 241.28 times that of the “both vaccine and drug” scenario. And
   fatality of the “drug only” scenario is 3.61 times that for the “both” scenario. From Fig 13b,
   for linear topology, the total fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios
   are respectively 28.24 and 66.86 times that of the “drug only” scenario. Also, from Fig 13b,
   total fatality for the “vaccine only” and “no countermeasure” scenarios are respectively 66.95
   and 158.51 times that of the “both vaccine and drug” scenario. And fatality of the “drug only”
   scenario is 2.37 times that for the “both” scenario.
                                                                   25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   Finite drug availability
   We now consider that the drug availability is finite and drug is no longer administered when
   the supply is exhausted. We assume that the first time a patient is administered the drug, he
   is handed out enough quantity of the drug for his daily consumption throughout the period of
   the outbreak. Since the period of the outbreak can vary and may depend on re-introduction of
   the infection from outside, we measure the drug supply in terms of the number of patients who
   has been administered the drug. Fig 14 plots the fatality as a function of the drug supply as
   measured above, and reveals that the fatality for the scenarios in which drug is administered,
   namely the “drug only” and “both drug and vaccine” decrease linearly with increase in drug
   supply, and remains constant once the supply crosses a threshold. Above the threshold value
   there is enough drug to administer to the population who need drugs. For the single cluster
   case, the fatality in the drug only case decreases from 4.4 million to 65, 808 as the drug supply
   increases from 0 to approximately 10 million, which constitutes the threshold value. Note
   that the population size is 10 million here, thus the fatality does not decrease any further
   once the drug supply is enough to preempt the entire population. The fatality in the both
   drug and vaccine scenario decreases from 1.8 million to 26, 752 (98.514%, see Fig 14a) as the
   drug supply increases from 0 to approximately 4 million, which constitutes the threshold value.
   Since individuals can also be preempted through vaccines, one only needs enough drug supply
   to preempt 4 million individuals to decrease the fatality count to its minimum possible value.
        Similarly, for the four cluster star topology, the fatality in the drug only scenario decreases
   from 17.6 million to 263, 234 (98.504%, see Fig 14b) as the drug supply increases from 0 to
   approximately 40 million, which constitutes the threshold value. The fatality in the both drug
   and vaccine scenario decreases from 7.58 million to 113, 305 (98.505%, see Fig 14b) as the drug
   supply increases from 0 to approximately 16.4 million, which constitutes the threshold value.
   In addition, for the five cluster linear topology, the fatality in drug only scenario decreases
   from 22 million to 329, 042 (98.504%, see Fig 14c) as the drug supply increases from 0 to
   approximately 50 million, which constitutes the threshold value. The fatality in both drug and
   vaccine scenario decreases from 9.3 million to 138, 821 (98.507%, see Fig 14c) as the drug supply
   increases from 0 to approximately 20 million, which constitutes the threshold value. Note that
   for the star topology, the threshold value for “both case” is approximately 4 times that of the
   corresponding single cluster since there are 4 clusters. This is because the total population is
   4 times the population for the corresponding single cluster. Similarly, for the linear topology,
                                                                   26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the threshold is exactly five times that for single cluster since the population size is 5 times as
   the number of clusters. Again, the threshold value is less than that in the drug only scenario
   for the same reason as for single cluster.
        The fatalities for the scenarios not involving drugs naturally do not change with increase
   in the availability of the drug. Also, note that when the drug supply is zero, i.e., no drug
   is available then the fatality in the drug only scenario equals that for the no countermeasure
   scenario, and the fatality in both drug and vaccine scenario equals that for the vaccine only
   scenario. For low value of the drug supply, the vaccine only scenario has lower fatality than
   the drug only scenario, but as the drug supply increases, the fatality for the drug only scenario
   falls below that of the vaccine only scenario. Thus, if the drug supply is low and if one needs
   to choose between the countermeasures, vaccine is better with respect to fatality count. And,
   high values of the drug supply substantially reduce the fatality count.
             (a) Single cluster                           (b) Star topology                          (c) Linear topology
            Fig 14: Relationship between fatalities and antiviral drug availability.
   Impact of topology
   We now compare the fatality counts across topologies and identify patterns that emerge. To-
   wards this end, we consider the fatalities in star and linear topologies reported in Figs 7 - 14.
   We compare the per cluster fatality (total fatality count normalized by the number of clus-
   ters) of the star and linear topologies for representative data points in the figures and report
   in Tables 1 to 5. In these Tables, we compare the fatalities for three distributions of initially
   infected individuals across the clusters (1) uniform distribution across clusters (2) concentration
   in the central cluster (clusters 1 and 3 respectively in the star and linear topologies) and (3)
   concentration in a peripheral cluster (clusters 2 and 1 in the star and linear topologies). We
   represent these as “Uniform”, “Central”, “Peripheral” respectively. To distinguish between the
   cases that cooperatives convert non-cooperatives and non-cooperatives convert cooperatives,
                                                                   27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   we add suffixes to the terms denoting the three distributions, that is, we denote the first case
   by UniformC, CentralC, and PeripheralC, and the second by UniformNC, CentralNC, and Pe-
   ripheralNC. When we consider only the first case, which is the default, we omit the suffixes
   altogether. The columns titled “Normalized Linear” and “Normalized Star” respectively rep-
   resent the per cluster fatalities for the Linear and Star topologies respectively. We obtain the
   difference between the per cluster fatalities of the star and the linear topologies (Column titled
   “Difference”) and present the difference as a percentage of the former in the tables (Column
   titled “% Change”). In Tables 1 - 4, we consider the scenario in which both drugs are vaccines
   are administered (“Both”). In Table 5, we additionally consider Drug only, Vaccine only, and
   Neither scenarios.
        We consistently observe the following from the tables: 1) the per cluster fatalities of the
   two topologies are about the same in the uniform case 2) the per cluster fatality is considerably
   higher in the star topology for the Central and Peripheral cases. The first happens because
   the initial number of infected individuals is the same in each cluster and the mobility rates to
   and from each cluster are the same throughout. We conjecture that the per cluster topologies
   will not significantly vary depending on the placement of the clusters for uniform distribution
   and symmetric mobility patterns. Now consider the Central and Peripheral cases. The average
   distance between a central or a peripheral cluster to the other clusters is higher for the star.
   Thus, if the initially infected individuals are concentrated in only the central or the peripheral
   cluster, over time the infection spreads faster in the star as compared to the linear leading to a
   greater number of per cluster fatalities in the former.
                                                                   28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    Distribution                     Normalized Linear            Normalized Star           Difference     Percentage change
    Uniform/α = 0                    56, 309                      56, 293                   -3, 061        -0.5.436%
    UniformC/α = 1                   19, 666                      19, 598                   -68            -0.346%
    UniformNC/α = 1                  62, 208                      62, 176                   -32            -0.051%
    Central/α = 0                    33, 316                      47, 038                   13, 722        41.19%
    CentralC/α = 1                   4, 041                       5, 067                    1, 026         25.39%
    CentralNC/α = 1                  36, 526                      51, 542                   15, 016        41.11%
    Peripheral/α = 0                 22, 516                      29, 657                   7, 141         31.72%
    PeripheralC/α = 1                4, 006                       4, 978                    972            24.26%
    PeripheralNC/α = 1               24, 729                      32, 561                   7, 832         31.67%
   Table 1: Per cluster fatality in Figs 7 and 8. In Figs 7a and 7b, Figs 8b and 8c, we
   consider a star topology with 4 clusters and a linear topology with 5 clusters respectively. C in
   UniformC, CentralC, PeripheralC denotes cooperatives converting non-cooperatives. Similarly,
   NC in uniformNC, CentralNC, PeripheralNC denotes non-cooperatives converting cooperatives.
   Recall that α is the opinion spread rate. When α = 0, the cooperatives and non-cooperatives
   will have the same values.
           Distribution                      Linear       Normalized Star         Difference        Percentage change
           Uniform/α = 0                     42, 060      42, 020                 -40               -0.095%
           UniformC/α = 1                    22, 421      22, 373                 -48               -0.214%
           UniformNC/α = 1                   55, 267      55, 190                 -77               -0.139%
           Central/α = 0                     22, 227      31, 154                 8, 927            40.16%
           CentralC/α = 1                    4, 638       5, 848                  1, 210            26.09%
           CentralNC/α = 1                   28, 919      40, 504                 11, 585           40.06%
           Peripheral/α = 0                  15, 468      20, 268                 4, 800            31.03%
           PeripheralC/α = 1                 4, 578       5, 700                  1, 122            24.51%
           PeripheralNC/α = 1                20, 171      26, 420                 6, 249            30.98%
   Table 2: Per cluster fatality in Fig 9. We also include the values obtained for the case
   where cooperatives convert non-cooperatives and cooperativity is 0.5. In Fig 9b and 9c, we
   consider a star topology with 4 clusters and a linear topology with 5 clusters respectively. C in
   UniformC, CentralC, PeripheralC denotes cooperatives converting non-cooperatives. Similarly,
   NC in uniformNC, CentralNC, PeripheralNC denotes non-cooperatives converting cooperatives.
   Recall that α is the opinion spread rate. When α = 0, the cooperatives and non-cooperatives
   will have the same values.
      Distribution                Normalized Linear            Normalized Star         Difference       Percentage change
      Uniform/λ = 0               4, 400, 000                  4, 400, 000             0                0%
      Uniform/λ = 5               222, 670                     222, 567                -103             -0.0463%
      Central/λ = 0               2, 687, 531                  3, 823, 157             1, 135, 626      42.26%
      Central/λ = 5               80, 860                      111, 508                30, 648          37.90%
      Peripheral/λ = 0            1, 800, 793                  2, 373, 055             572, 262         31.78%
      Peripheral/λ = 5            63, 089                      80, 999                 17, 910          28.39%
   Table 3: Per cluster fatality in Fig 10. In Figs 10a and 10b, we consider a star topology
   with 8 clusters and a linear topology with 10 clusters respectively. We denote the preemption
   scale factor as λ.
                                                                   29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
      Distribution                Normalized Linear           Normalized Star           Difference   Percentage change
      Uniform/κ = 0               27, 891                     27, 694                   -197         -0.7063%
      Uniform/κ = 1               27, 891                     27, 694                   -197         -0.7063%
      Central/κ = 0               2, 443                      6, 952                    4, 509       184.57%
      Central/κ = 1               15, 083                     21, 034                   5, 951       39.46%
      Peripheral/κ = 0            2, 443                      6, 952                    4, 509       184.57%
      Peripheral/κ = 1            14, 361                     18, 528                   4, 167       29.02%
   Table 4: Per cluster fatality in Fig 11. In Figs 11a and 11b, we consider a star topology
   with 8 clusters and a linear topology with 5 clusters respectively. Recall that κ is the mobility
   rate.
     Distribution                                         Normalized Linear           Normalized Star      Difference       Percentage change
     Both/uniform, m = 0                                  1, 858, 493                 1, 895, 512          37, 019          1.99%
     Both/uniform, m = 50 million                         27, 764                     28, 326              562              2.02%
     Drug/uniform, m = 0                                  4, 400, 000                 4, 400, 000          0                0%
     Drug/uniform, m = 50 million                         65, 808                     65, 808              0                0%
     Vaccine/uniform, m = 0                               1, 858, 493                 1, 895, 512          37, 019          1.99%
     Vaccine/uniform, m = 50 million                      1, 858, 493                 1, 895, 512          37, 019          1.99%
     Neither/uniform, m = 0                               4, 400, 000                 4, 400, 000          0                0%
     Neither/uniform, m = 50 million                      4, 400, 000                 4, 400, 000          0                0%
     Both/central, m = 0                                  737, 058                    1, 013, 650          276, 592         37.53%
     Both/central, m = 50 million                         10, 803                     14, 842              4, 039           37.39%
     Drug/central, m = 0                                  2, 690, 869                 3, 823, 159          1, 132, 290      42.08%
     Drug/central, m = 50 million                         41, 522                     57, 627              16, 105          38.79%
     Vaccine/central, m = 0                               737, 058                    1, 013, 650          276, 592         37.53%
     Vaccine/central, m = 50 million                      737, 058                    1, 013, 650          276, 592         37.53%
     Neither/central, m = 0                               2, 690, 869                 3, 823, 159          1, 132, 290      42.08%
     Neither/central, m = 50 million                      2, 690, 869                 3, 823, 159          1, 132, 290      42.08%
     Both/peripheral, m = 0                               558, 877                    721, 110             162, 233         29.03%
     Both/peripheral, m = 50 million                      8, 242                      10, 627              2, 385           28.94%
     Drug/peripheral, m = 0                               1, 804, 136                 2, 373, 052          568, 916         31.53%
     Drug/peripheral, m = 50 million                      28, 028                     35, 916              7, 888           28.14%
     Vaccine/peripheral, m = 0                            558, 877                    721, 110             162, 233         29.03%
     Vaccine/peripheral, m = 50 million                   558, 877                    721, 110             162, 233         29.03%
     Neither/peripheral, m = 0                            1, 804, 136                 2, 373, 052          568, 916         31.53%
     Neither/peripheral, m = 50 million                   1, 804, 136                 2, 373, 052          568, 916         31.53%
   Table 5: Per cluster fatality in Fig 14. In Figs 14b and 14c, we consider a star topology
   with 4 clusters and a linear topology with 5 clusters respectively. We denote the number of
   individuals who have been administered the drug as m.
   Drug administering policy has a significant impact
   We compare various drug administering policies with respect to (1) fatalities (2) health system
   load (number of doctor visits), considering the scenario in which both drugs and vaccines are
   administered.
                                                                   30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        We first compare policies 1 (i.e., only people with rashes receive drugs) and policy 2 (i.e.,
   all people with fever and rash in a cluster receive drugs provided the number of patients with
   symptoms, that is, fever, rash, etc. exceeds a threshold of choice). First we consider only
   1 cluster and threshold as 2000, that is, 0.02% of the population in each cluster. Policy 1
   preempts 3, 455, 827 people with antiviral drugs while 241, 434 people died. Policy 2 preempts
   3, 911, 249 people with drugs while 26, 752 people died. Thus, the fatality under policy 1 is
   approximately 9 times the fatality under policy 2. We get the first indication that different
   policies for administering drugs substantially alter the fatality count. But, clearly, policy 2 will
   need greater number of drugs as it preempts a greater number of individuals. We therefore next
   compare different policies for a finite supply of drugs.
        We consider three different policies for multiple clusters and limited availability of drugs.
   Policies 1 and 2 are as before. Under policy 3, drugs are administered to everyone in a cluster
   once the number of patients with symptoms in the cluster exceeds a certain threshold (2000 for
   us). Drugs can be administered as long as the supply lasts. In Figs 15a and 16a, we consider the
   Central and Peripheral distributions for the initial infections, we consider the Uniform scenario
   in Figs 15b and 16b.
                        (a) Star topology                                                 (b) Star topology
                          Fig 15: Policies for drug deployment (star topology).
                                                                   31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                   (a) Linear topology                                                       (b) Linear topology
                         Fig 16: Policies for drug deployment (linear topology).
        We plot the fatality as a function of the drug supply as measured in the number of individuals
   preempted from the available supply for the star and linear topologies. We choose a star of 8
   and a linear topology of 5 nodes to demonstrate the applicability of our model on topologies
   of different sizes. As shown in Figs 15 and 16, fatality decreases linearly with the supply of
   drugs until the supply reaches a threshold beyond which fatality does not change with antiviral
   availability. Recall that we had observed the same trend for Policy 1. We show that other
   policies we consider in this section follow the same trend. Next, we observe that Policy 2 always
   has lower fatality than policy 1. For low values of drug supply, policies 1 and 2 attain lower
   fatality as compared to policy 3. Thus, Policy 2 is the best in this case.
        Once the drug supply exceeds a certain level, Policy 3 attains the lowest fatality among
   all 3 policies. Intuitively, when the availability of drugs is large, the policy that preemptively
   administers drugs to most individuals who are in proximity of infected individuals would attain
   the lowest fatalities. This is what Policy 3 does. In contrast, when the drug availability is
   limited, policies that administer drugs to individuals without symptoms as well will quickly
   exhaust their supplies and from then onwards not be able to protect those who need it most,
   e.g., those with symptoms. Thus, Policy 3 will not do well under these circumstances, which is
   what we observe. But, when the drug availability is low, it is unclear if it is better to reserve
   drugs for those in rash stage (Policy 1) or administer drugs to those with fever and who are in
   clusters where infection level has crossed a given value (Policy 2). The model informs us that
   the latter is a better option in this case, as by additionally preempting those with fever Policy
   2 reduces the number of infectious individuals and thereby reduces the spread of the infection.
                                                                   32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        The fatalities significantly differ depending on the policy we deploy. For instance, when the
   initial infections are uniformly distributed across the star topology and the quantity of drugs
   available is enough for the population, the ratio between the fatalities of the worst and best
   policies at any given point can become as high as 323 (1584942 : 4902) and that between the
   fatalities of the second best and best policies at any given point can become as high as 36.0
   (176648 : 4902) as the figures reveal.
                      (a) Linear topology                                                 (b) Star topology
                               Fig 17: Doctor’s visits against drug availability.
        During the outbreak of an infectious disease, the number of doctor visits of individuals is
   an important measure of the health of a system. We consider that an individual will visit the
   doctor’s office at the onset of fever (that is, Prodrome state). Thus, the number of doctor visits
   by individuals equals the number of individuals who enter the Prodrome state. We plot this as
   a function of drug supply for the three policies under consideration. As Fig 17 shows, when the
   drug supply is 0, the three policies will have equal number of doctor’s visits. This is anticipated
   as the policies differ only in the conditions under which drug is administered. The number of
   doctor visits decreases only slightly with an increase in drug supply for Policy 1. This is because
   under Policy 1 an individual is administered drug only after he develops a rash, which happens
   after he develops a fever, regardless of the drug supply. The slight decrease happens as greater
   drug supply enables the preemption of a greater number of individuals who develop rashes and
   thereby reduces the spread of the disease. For the other two policies, the number of doctor visits
   decreases considerably (and linearly) with an increase in the supply of drugs until the supply
   reaches a level beyond which the number of doctor visits does not change with an increase in
   the availability of antiviral drugs. The pattern is similar to how the fatality count changes for
                                                                   33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   these policies as a function of the drug supply. And, as the drug supply increases, the number of
   doctor visits under Policy 1 becomes substantially higher than those for the other two policies.
   As shown in Fig 17a, once the drug supply exceeds a certain level, the number of doctor’s visits
   for Policy 1 is respectively 8.93 and 247 times that for Policy 2 and Policy 3. Similarly, from
   Fig 17b, the number of doctor’s visits for Policy 1 is respectively 8.97 and 323 times that for
   Policy 2 and Policy 3. For low values of drug supply, Policy 2 attains a lower number of doctor
   visits as compared to Policy 3. Thus, Policy 2 maximally reduces the load on doctors among
   the 3 policies in this case. Once the drug supply exceeds a certain level, Policy 3 attains the
   lowest load on doctors among all 3 policies. From Fig 17a, the number of doctor visits under
   Policy 2 is 36 times that for Policy 3 in this region. From Fig 17b, the number of doctor visits
   under Policy 2 is 27.7 times that for Policy 3 in this region. The explanation for this relative
   performance is similar to that for fatality counts given in the previous paragraph.
   Discussions
   Based on our findings, we recommend policies that public health authorities can implement
   should smallpox re-emerge. Some of the recommendations are specific to smallpox, others are
   likely to apply for the containment of any infectious disease such as COVID-19.
   From results of investigation of opinion dynamics:                                  We have shown that evolution of
   opinion with respect to receptivity of vaccine has a strong impact on fatality count. Therefore,
   health authorities and other policymakers should seek to influence exchange of opinion towards
   enhancing receptivity to vaccine, possibly through health education seminars, workshops, vigor-
   ous dissemination of health information on social, digital and conventional media and through
   direct engagement with influencers on these platforms.
   From results of investigation on mobility patterns and distribution of initial infec-
   tion:    We have shown that other things being equal, epidemics are more disastrous, when 1)
   the initial infections are uniformly distributed across various clusters than when all the ini-
   tial infections only occur in one cluster, 2) the outbreak originates from the central cluster(s)
   than when it originates from the peripheral cluster(s). Thus health authorities should anticipate
   that bioterrorist attacks will seed the initially infected uniformly across a region, the authorities
   should also be vigilant more about central regions than peripheral ones.
                                                                   34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        In addition, when the initial infections are uniformly distributed, fatalities in each cluster
   are the same irrespective of the mobility rates between the clusters. On the other hand, when
   the initial infections occur in one cluster only, total fatalities would escalate with an increase
   in mobility rates. Therefore, policymakers should opt for cordoning off areas where infection
   level is high before the infection spreads widely; once the latter happens reducing mobility rates
   across areas is unlikely to contain the disease.
   From results of investigation on impact of administering drugs:                                   We have shown that
   the most effective countermeasure consists of a combination of antiviral drugs and vaccines,
   but if only one countermeasure can be administered it ought to be the former. Therefore,
   policymakers should endeavor to stock enough antivirals in case smallpox reemerges. People
   are usually more receptive to receiving drugs than vaccines, thus a less intense information
   campaign may suffice for containing the disease through the former.
        In addition, we have shown that regardless of the pattern of distribution of initially infected
   individuals the fatalities substantially decrease if the delay in administering vaccines and deliv-
   ering drugs to individuals decrease. Thus, health authorities must be prepared at short notice
   to supply large amounts of vaccines and drugs to healthcare facilities and deploy a large number
   of health workers to administer/deliver those in the event of an outbreak.
   From results of investigation on impact of topology:                                   Our results indicate that other
   things being equal, the star topology has about the same or higher fatalities per cluster than
   the linear topology, the fatalities per cluster are about the same when the initial infections are
   uniformly distributed. This happens because there exists a central cluster in the star topology
   which is adjacent to all other topologies, in the linear topology the central cluster is much
   farther off from the peripheral clusters. This has important implications on pandemic sensitive
   urban design - topologies that have central regions that are close to all other regions will be
   more vulnerable to an outbreak and hence better avoided. If such topologies are inevitable
   because of legacy issues or because of fundamental constraints such as geography, then the
   health authorities need to monitor those more closely and stock greater amount of drugs for the
   residents and incentivize formation of consensus to accept vaccines as and when available.
   From results of investigation on various drug administering policies: We find that
   for low (large, respectively) values of drug supply, the health authorities should opt for policy
                                                                   35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   2 (3, respectively) to lower the fatality count and the number of visits to doctors’ offices. Thus,
   policymakers should be flexible about the choice of the policy and adapt it to the resource at
   hand.
        Our first, second and fourth findings and the resulting recommendations are also likely to
   hold for other infectious diseases, e.g., COVID-19. The other two findings and the resulting
   recommendations are specific to smallpox.
   Acknowledgment
   SIGA Technologies, Inc. has provided gift to support the Sarkar lab.
   References
    [1] Bavarian Nordic delivers 1 million doses of first vaccine developed under U.S. bioprepared-
         ness program to the Strategic National Stockpile. 2010 July. [cited 2020 Apr 3] .Available
         from : http://www.bavarian-nordic.com/investor/news/news.aspx?news=2041.
    [2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Bioterrorism Agents/Diseases.
         2018 Apr. [cited 2020 June 10]. Available from: https://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/
         agentlist-category.asp.
    [3] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smallpox Prevention and Treatment.
         2019 Jan. [cited 2020 May 22]. Available from:                              https://www.cdc.gov/smallpox/
         prevention-treatment/index.html.
    [4] DailyMed. TPOXX - tecovirimat monohydrate capsule. U.S. National Library of Medicine.
         2018. [cited 2020 September 15]. Available from:                            https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/
         dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=fce826ab-4d6a-4139-a2ee-a304a913a253.
    [5] The spectre of smallpox lingers. Nature 560:281. doi: 10. 1038/ d41586-018-05936-x
         (Aug 2018).
    [6] Apolloni, A., Poletto, C., Ramasco, J. J., Jensen, P., and Colizza, V. Metapop-
         ulation epidemic models with heterogeneous mixing and travel behaviour. Theoretical Bi-
         ology and Medical Modelling 11, 1 (2014), 3.
                                                                   36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
    [7] Benecke, O., and DeYoung, S. E. Anti-vaccine decision-making and measles resur-
         gence in the United States. Global Pediatric Health 6 (2019), 2333794X19862949.
    [8] Carrieri, V., Madio, L., and Principe, F. Vaccine hesitancy and (fake) news: Quasi-
         experimental evidence from Italy. Health economics 28, 11 (2019), 1377–1382.
    [9] Colizza, V., and Vespignani, A. Epidemic modeling in metapopulation systems with
         heterogeneous coupling pattern: Theory and simulations. Journal of theoretical biology
         251, 3 (2008), 450–467.
   [10] Crist, C.            WebMD Poll: Most Would Wait on COVID Vaccine.                                2020 Jul. [cited
         2020 September 14]. Available from: https://www.webmd.com/lung/news/20200728/
         webmd-covid-vaccine-poll.
   [11] Eichner, M., and Dietz, K. Transmission potential of smallpox: estimates based on
         detailed data from an outbreak. American journal of epidemiology 158, 2 (2003), 110–117.
   [12] Eshghi, S., Preciado, V., Sarkar, S., Venkatesh, S., Zhao, Q., D’Souza, R., and
         Swami, A. Spread, then target, and advertise in waves: optimal budget allocation across
         advertising channels. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering (2018).
   [13] Fenner, F., Henderson, D. A., Arita, I., Jezek, Z., Ladnyi, I. D., et al. Smallpox
         and its eradication, vol. 6. World Health Organization Geneva, 1988.
   [14] Finin, P., Kosaraju, A., Rose, E., and Rubin, H. The role of vaccination, an-
         tiorthopoxvirus drug, and social cooperativity in a mathematical model of smallpox con-
         trol. Biosecurity and bioterrorism: biodefense strategy, practice, and science 11, 1 (2013),
         59–72.
   [15] Graeden, E., Fielding, R., Steinhouse, K. E., and Rubin, I. N. Modeling the effect
         of herd immunity and contagiousness in mitigating a smallpox outbreak. Medical Decision
         Making 35, 5 (2015), 648–659.
   [16] Halloran, M. E., Longini, I. M., Nizam, A., and Yang, Y. Containing bioterrorist
         smallpox. Science 298, 5597 (2002), 1428–1432.
   [17] Hatch, G. J., Graham, V. A., Bewley, K. R., Tree, J. A., Dennis, M., Taylor,
         I., Funnell, S. G. P., Bate, S. R., Steeds, K., Tipton, T., et al. Assessment of
                                                                   37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
         the protective effect of Imvamune and Acam2000 vaccines against aerosolized monkeypox
         virus in cynomolgus macaques. Journal of virology 87, 14 (2013), 7805–7815.
   [18] Henderson, D. A. Smallpox epidemic models and response strategies. Biosecurity and
         bioterrorism: biodefense strategy, practice, and science 11, 1 (2013), 73–74.
   [19] House, T., Hall, I., Danon, L., and Keeling, M. J. Contingency planning for a
         deliberate release of smallpox in Great Britain-the role of geographical scale and contact
         structure. BMC infectious diseases 10, 1 (2010), 25.
   [20] Kaplan, E. H., Craft, D. L., and Wein, L. M. Emergency response to a smallpox
         attack: the case for mass vaccination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99,
         16 (2002), 10935–10940.
   [21] Kemper, A. R., Davis, M. M., and Freed, G. L. Expected adverse events in a mass
         smallpox vaccination campaign. Effective Clinical Practice 5, 2 (2002).
   [22] Kermack, W. O., and McKendrick, A. G. A contribution to the mathematical theory
         of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a
         mathematical and physical character 115, 772 (1927), 700–721.
   [23] Kim, J., Sarkar, S., Venkatesh, S. S., Ryerson, M. S., and Starobinski, D.
         An epidemiological diffusion framework for vehicular messaging in general transportation
         networks. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 131 (2020), 160–190.
   [24] MacIntyre, C., Heslop, D., Nand, D., Schramm, C., Butel, M., Rawlinson,
         W., Baker, M., Kiedrzynski, T., Nelson, C., Rosewell, A., et al. Exercise
         Mataika: White Paper on response to a smallpox bioterrorism release in the Pacific. Global
         Biosecurity 1, 1 (2019).
   [25] MacIntyre, C. R., Costantino, V., Chen, X., Segelov, E., Chughtai, A. A.,
         Kelleher, A., Kunasekaran, M., and Lane, J. M. Influence of population immuno-
         suppression and past vaccination on smallpox reemergence. Emerging infectious diseases
         24, 4 (2018), 646.
   [26] Massoudi, M. S., Barker, L., and Schwartz, B. Effectiveness of postexposure vacci-
         nation for the prevention of smallpox: results of a delphi analysis. The Journal of infectious
         diseases 188, 7 (2003), 973–976.
                                                                   38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   [27] Meltzer, M. I., Damon, I., LeDuc, J. W., and Millar, J. D. Modeling potential
         responses to smallpox as a bioterrorist weapon. Emerging infectious diseases 7, 6 (2001),
         959.
   [28] Noyce, R. S., Lederman, S., and Evans, D. H. Construction of an infectious horsepox
         virus vaccine from chemically synthesized DNA fragments. PloS one 13, 1 (2018).
   [29] Pelčić, G., Karačić, S., Mikirtichan, G. L., Kubar, O. I., Leavitt, F. J., Tai,
         M. C.-t., Morishita, N., Vuletić, S., and Tomašević, L. Religious exception for
         vaccination or religious excuses for avoiding vaccination. Croatian medical journal 57, 5
         (2016), 516.
   [30] Reardon, S. Forgotten NIH smallpox virus languishes on death row. Nature 514, 7524
         (2014), 544.
   [31] Robeznieks, A.                    Stopping the scourge of social media misinformation on vac-
         cines. American Medical Association.                            2019 Mar. [cited 2020 Jun 10]. Avail-
         able         from:                 https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/public-health/
         stopping-scourge-social-media-misinformation-vaccines.                                      Accessed:     June 10,
         2020.
   [32] Smith, R. Modelling disease ecology with mathematics. American Institute of Mathemat-
         ical Sciences Springfield, 2008.
   [33] Stroud, C., Viswanathan, K., Powell, T., Bass, R. R., on Prepositioned Medi-
         cal Countermeasures for the Public, C., et al. Current Dispensing Strategies for
         Medical Countermeasures for Anthrax. In Prepositioning Antibiotics for Anthrax. National
         Academies Press (US), 2011.
                                                                   39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   A       Equations of Smallpox disease dynamics
   A.1      Developing the Clustered Epidemiological Differential Equations for
            Disease, Information and Countermeasure Dynamics
   We first consider the case of no countermeasure.
                  Table 6: Relevant abbreviations (no countermeasure scenario)
                       Compartment             Description
                                Sc             immunodeficient susceptibles
                               Sh              immunocompetent susceptibles
                               Ac              immunodeficient early incubators
                               Ah              immunocompetent early incubators
                               Bc              immunodeficient late incubators
                               Bh              immunocompetent late incubators
                                Pc             immunodeficient prodromals
                               Ph              immunocompetent prodromals
                               Cc              immunodeficient individuals in early rash stage
                               Ch              immunocompetent individuals in early rash stage
                               Ec              immunodeficient individuals in late rash stage
                               Eh              immunocompetent individuals in late rash stage
                                R              Individuals that recovered from the disease
                                D              Dead
        Referring to the notations in Table 6, we index each term by the clusters the individuals in the
   state inhabit. More specifically, Shi (t) is the fraction of individuals who are susceptible and im-
   munocompetent and are in cluster i at time t, Sci (t), Ahi (t), Aci (t), Bhi (t), Bci (t), Phi (t), Pci (t), Chi (t), Cci (t)
   may be defined similarly using Table 6 as a basis. Finally, Ri (t), Di (t) are respectively the frac-
   tions of individuals who are recovered and dead and are in cluster i at time t. Let Ii (t) be the
   fraction of the infectious individuals in cluster i at time t, that is, the individuals who can pass
   on the disease to the susceptibles through contact. Then,
                              Ii (t) = Pci (t) + Phi (t) + Cci (t) + Chi (t) + Eci (t) + Ehi (t).
   Interaction between individuals corresponding to Shi (t), Sci (t) and Ij (t) spread the disease to
   the susceptibles and transform them to early incubators - refer to the yellow arrows in Fig 1.
   Natural progression of the disease change Ahi (t) to Bhi (t) to Phi (t) to Chi (t) to Ehi (t), and
   finally Ehi (t) to either Ri (t) or Di (t); also, Aci (t) to Bci (t) to Pci (t) to Cci (t) to Eci (t), and
   finally Eci (t) to either Ri (t) or Di (t) - refer to the blue arrows in Fig 1. Mobility changes
                                                                   40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the cluster indices. The transitions are similar for the immunocompetent and immunodeficient
   individuals, but the fractions of those who recover in each populace are different.
        We model the evolution of the states as per a set of epidemiological differential equations,
   which we call clustered epidemiological differential equations or the CEDE. Let Ṡci be the deriva-
   tive of Sci (t) with respect to time t (i.e., the rate of change with respect to t). Ȧhi (t), Ȧci (t),
   Ḃhi (t), Ḃci (t), Ṗhi (t), Ṗci (t), Ċhi (t), Ċci (t), Ṙi (t), Ḋi (t) may be defined similarly. The parame-
   ters of the CEDE have been summarized and defined in Tables 7 and 8 next.
            Table 7: Parameters for the CEDE in the no countermeasure scenario
            Parameter                             Symbols         Some associated terms in (1) - (14)
            Mobility rate                             κi,j        Shj (t)κij , Bci (t)κji , Ehj (t)κij , Pci (t)κji , etc.
            Disease spread rate                      φi,j         Shi (t)φji Ij (t), Sci (t)φji Ij (t)
            Opinion spread rate                      αi,j         This scenario is not affected by opinion
            Disease transition rate             ω, β, γ, ρ, δ     Ahi (t)ω, Pci (t)β, Chi (t)ρ, Rci (t)δ, etc.
                               Table 8: The disease transition rate parameters
         Parameters         Description of parameters
               1
               ω            Expected time an individual is in early incubation
               1
               β            Expected time an individual is in late incubation
               1
               γ            Expected time an individual is in prodrome stage
               1
               ρ            Expected time an individual is in early rash stage
               1
                δ           Expected time an individual is in late rash stage
               σ            Probability that an immunocompetent individual at late rash stage dies
               σ̃           Probability that an immunodeficient individual at late rash stage dies
                                                                   41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                 perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        The CEDE follows:
                                      X n                          X n                     X  n
                 Ṡhi (t) = −               Shi (t)φji Ij (t) +         Shj (t)κij −             Shi (t)κji                    (1)
                                      j=1                          j=1                      i=1
                                                                   j6=i                     i6=j
                                      X n                         X  n                    X  n
                 Ṡci (t) = −               Sci (t)φji Ij (t) +         Scj (t)κij −             Sci (t)κji                    (2)
                                      j=1                         j=1                      i=1
                                                                   j6=i                    i6=j
                                   Xn                                         X  n                      X  n
                Ȧhi (t) =               Shi (t)φji Ij (t) − Ahi (t)ω +             Ahj (t)κij −              Ahi (t)κji       (3)
                                   j=1                                         j=1                       i=1
                                                                               j6=i                      i6=j
                                   Xn                                         X n                      X n
                Ȧci (t) =               Sci (t)φji Ij (t) − Aci (t)ω +             Acj (t)κij −             Aci (t)κji        (4)
                                   j=1                                        j=1                      i=1
                                                                              j6=i                     i6=j
                                                                X  n                      X n
                Ḃhi (t) = Ahi (t)ω − Bhi (t)β +                       Bhj (t)κij −             Bhi (t)κji                     (5)
                                                                j=1                       i=1
                                                                 j6=i                     i6=j
                                                               X  n                     X n
                Ḃci (t) = Aci (t)ω − Bci (t)β +                       Bcj (t)κij −            Bci (t)κji                      (6)
                                                               j=1                      i=1
                                                                j6=i                    i6=j
                                                               X  n                     X n
                Ṗhi (t) = Bhi (t)β − Phi (t)γ +                       Phj (t)κij −            Phi (t)κji                      (7)
                                                               j=1                      i=1
                                                                j6=i                    i6=j
                                                              X  n                    X n
                 Ṗci (t) = Bci (t)β − Pci (t)γ +                     Pcj (t)κij −            Pci (t)κji                       (8)
                                                              j=1                     i=1
                                                               j6=i                   i6=j
                                                              X  n                     X  n
                Ċhi (t) = Phi (t)γ − Chi (t)ρ +                      Chj (t)κij −             Chi (t)κji                      (9)
                                                               j=1                      i=1
                                                               j6=i                     i6=j
                                                              X n                     X n
                 Ċci (t) = Pci (t)γ − Cci (t)ρ +                    Ccj (t)κij −             Cci (t)κji                      (10)
                                                              j=1                     i=1
                                                              j6=i                    i6=j
                                                               X n                     X  n
                Ėhi (t) = Chi (t)ρ − Ehi (t)δ +                      Ehj (t)κij −             Ehi (t)κji                     (11)
                                                               j=1                      i=1
                                                               j6=i                     i6=j
                                                              X n                     X n
                 Ėci (t) = Cci (t)ρ − Eci (t)δ +                    Ecj (t)κij −             Eci (t)κji                      (12)
                                                              j=1                     i=1
                                                              j6=i                    i6=j
                                                                                    X  n                      X n
                  Ṙi (t) = ((1 − σ)Ehi (t) + (1 − σ̃Eci (t)) δ +                            Rhj (t)κij −          Rhi (t)κji (13)
                                                                                     j=1                      i=1
                                                                                     j6=i                     i6=j
                  Ḋi (t) = σ̃Eci (t)δ + σEhi (t)δ                                                                            (14)
        First note that (1) is similar to (2) as transitions are similar for the immunocompetent
                                                                       42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   and immunodeficient individuals. The same observation may be made for ((3), (4)), ((5), (6)),
   ((7), (8)), ((9), (10)), ((11), (12)). So, we only explain (1), (3), (5), (7), (9), (11), as also (13),
   (14).
        The first terms in (1), (3), (the terms in green color) are quadratic terms which represent
   the spread of the disease to the susceptibles due to interaction with the infectious individuals
   and the subsequent transformation of the susceptibles to early incubators - refer to the yellow
   arrows in Fig 1. Note that quadratic terms represent interactional changes as those changes
   involve interaction between two individuals (as is typical with epidemiological modeling starting
   from the classical Kermack–McKendrick work [22]). Since the spread of the disease reduces the
   number of susceptibles and increases the number of early incubators, the first term in (1) has
   a positive sign and that in (3) has a negative sign. The parameter φi,j represents the rate of
   spread and has been defined in the methods section.
        The last two terms in (1), (3), (5), (7), (9), (11), (13) (the terms in blue) are linear terms
   representing mobility of individuals across clusters. The positive and negative terms respectively
   represent inflow into and outflow from the cluster. The dead individuals do not move, so we do
   not see such terms in (14). The mobility rates have been defined in the methods section.
        All other terms in (3), (5), (7), (9), (11), (13), and (14) (the terms in red) represent the
   natural progression of the disease - refer to the yellow arrows in Fig 1. The positive (negative,
   respectively) terms correspond to arrows directed towards (away, respectively) from the cor-
   responding state. For example the second term in (3) and the first term in (5) represent the
   natural progression from early incubation to late incubation. The first term in (13) represents
   the recovery of immunocompetent and immunodeficient individuals from the late rash stage.
        Finally, the solution of the CEDE provides the spatio-temporal distribution for the spread
   of the disease, namely the fraction of individuals who (1) are dead and are in cluster i at
   time t (Di (t)), (2) have recovered and are in cluster i at time t (Ri (t)), (3) are susceptible
   and are in cluster i at time t ((Sci + Shi )(t)), (4) are infected and are in cluster i at time
   t ((Pci + Phi + Cci + Chi + Eci + Ehi )(t)), (5) are contagious and are in cluster i at time t
   ((Sci + Shi + Aci + Ahi + Bci + Bhi + Pci + Phi + Cci + Chi + Eci + Ehi )(t)).
   A.2      Drug only
   Comparing the state transitions for the “no countermeasure” and the “drug only” scenarios,
   as depicted in Figs 1 and 2, we notice that the latter varies from the former in that it has
                                                                   43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   one additional state called Preempted or Q. Thus, the CEDE for the drug only scenario can be
   obtained from (1) to (14) by adding an equation that models the transition to this state and
   modifying (1) to (14) to reflect this transition. Let Q(t) be the fraction of individuals who have
   been preempted after receiving the drug. Then, (15) represents the evolution of Q(t).
                                       X  n
                       Q̇(t) =               (Pci (t)τi + Phi (t)τi + Cci (t)µi + Chi (t)µi + Bci (t)τi
                                        i=1
                                       + Bhi (t)τi + Aci (t)τi + Ahi (t)τi + Sci (t)τi + Shi (t)τi )                       (15)
        Here τi is the reciprocal of the expected time required for an individual to receive the drug
   in cluster i times the probability that the drug preempts the disease given that the individual
   is yet to reach the rash stage. Similarly, µi is the reciprocal of the expected time required for
   patients in cluster i to receive the drug times the preemption probability in the rash stage. The
   terms τi Pci (t), τi Phi (t), µi Cci (t), µi Chi (t), τi Aci (t), τi Ahi (t), τi Bci (t), τi Bhi (t), τi Sci (t), τi Shi (t),
   represent the preemption of the individuals in cluster i in the respective states. Due to these
   preemptions, (1) through (13) will respectively be decremented by Shi τi , Sci τi , Ahi τi , Aci τi ,
   Bhi τi , Bci τi , Phi τi , Pci τi , Chi µi , and Cci µi .
        The CEDE above can cater to a range of policies for administering of the drug through
   appropriate choice of the τi , and µi . A policy choice may for example be to administer the drug
   at a higher rate in certain clusters, either because of their centrality and thereby the prospect
   of infectious individuals therein infecting others at a higher rate, or because the number of
   infected individuals is high there. Such policies may be represented by selecting a higher value
   for the corresponding τi s. A policy choice may be to administer the drug to only those showing
   certain symptoms, e.g., fever. The τi s may then be selected based on the stage of the disease -
   then they would be indexed by the stage as well. Finally, when the drug availability is finite,
   τi and µi may be made dependent on time, and as the drug supply is exhausted, the τi and µi
   may be chosen to be 0.
        Finally, the solution of the CEDE provides the spatio-temporal distribution for the spread
   of the disease and the impact of the countermeasure (drug). These are captured in the fraction
   of individuals who (1) are dead and are in cluster i at time t (Di (t)), (2) have recovered and
   are in cluster i at time t (Ri (t)), (3) are preempted (through drug) and are in cluster i at time
   t (Qi (t)), (4) are susceptible and are in cluster i at time t ((Sci + Shi )(t)), (5) are infected and
                                                                   44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   are in cluster i at time t ((Pci + Phi + Cci + Chi + Eci + Ehi )(t)), (6) are contagious and are in
   cluster i at time t ((Sci + Shi + Aci + Ahi + Bci + Bhi + Pci + Phi + Cci + Chi + Eci + Ehi )(t)).
   A.3      Vaccine only
   The principal difference between the “Vaccine only” scenario and the earlier scenarios lies in
   the incorporation of the opinion dynamics. The individuals must now be classified based on
   their cooperativity, leading to the new states enunciated in Table 9.
                        Table 9: Relevant abbreviations (vaccine only scenario)
           Compartment             Description
                  Sac              immunodeficient cooperative susceptibles
                  Sbc              immunodeficient non-cooperative susceptibles
                  Sah              immunocompetent cooperative susceptibles
                  Sbh              immunocompetent non-cooperative susceptibles
                  Aac              immunodeficient cooperative early incubators
                  Abc              immunodeficient non-cooperative early incubators
                 Aah               immunocompetent cooperative early incubators
                  Abh              immunocompetent non-cooperative early incubators
                  Bac              immunodeficient cooperative late incubators
                  Bbc              immunodeficient non-cooperative late incubators
                 Bah               immunocompetent cooperative late incubators
                  Bbh              immunocompetent non-cooperative late incubators
                  Pac              immunodeficient cooperative prodromals
                  Pbc              immunodeficient non-cooperative prodromals
                  Pah              immunocompetent cooperative prodromals
                  Pbh              immunocompetent non-cooperative prodromals
                  Cac              immunodeficient cooperative individuals in early rash stage
                  Cbc              immunodeficient non-cooperative individuals in early rash stage
                  Cah              immunocompetent cooperative individuals in early rash stage
                  Cbh              immunocompetent non-cooperative individuals in early rash stage
                  Eac              immunodeficient cooperative individuals in late rash stage
                  Ebc              immunodeficient non-cooperative individuals in late rash stage
                 Eah               immunocompetent cooperative individuals in late rash stage
                  Ebh              immunocompetent non-cooperative individuals in late rash stage
                  Ra               Cooperative individuals that recovered from the disease
                  Rb               Non-cooperative individuals that recovered from the disease
                   Q               Vaccinated (immunized)
                   D               Dead
        To consider the impact of space, we further classify individuals in the states given in Table 9
   based on the cluster they inhabit. Thus, Sahi (t) (Sbci (t), respectively) is the fraction of im-
   munocompetent cooperative (immunodeficient non-cooperative, respectively) susceptibles who
   are in cluster i at time t. As before, Ii (t) is the fraction of the infectious individuals in cluster
                                                                   45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   i at time t. Let Xi (t) be the fraction of individuals who are cooperative and are in cluster i at
   time t. Thus,
           Ii (t) = Pahi (t) + Paci (t) + Pbhi (t) + Pbci (t) + Cahi (t) + Caci (t) + Cbhi (t) + Cbci (t)
                          + Eahi (t) + Eaci (t) + Ebhi (t) + Ebci (t)
          Xi (t) = Vi (t) + Sahi (t) + Saci (t) + Aahi (t) + Aaci (t) + Bahi (t) + Baci (t) + Pahi (t)
                          + Paci (t) + Cahi (t) + Caci (t) + Eahi (t) + Eaci (t) + Rahi (t) + Raci (t)
        The spread of opinions is modeled in the CEDE through quadratic terms (the terms in
   orange) representing opinion exchange interactions between the non-cooperative and the co-
   operative individuals, just as the spread of disease is modeled through quadratic terms (the
   terms in green) representing physical contact based interactions between the susceptible and
   infectious individuals. For simplicity, in this subsection, we present the CEDE only for the sce-
   nario that during opinion exchanges the cooperatives persuade the noncooperatives to become
   cooperatives.
        The immunocompetent cooperative susceptibles (respectively early incubators) who are in
   cluster i are preempted (through vaccination) at the rate θi (πi respectively). The preemption
   rate is the product of the reciprocal of the expected delay in developing immunity and the
   probability that the vaccine provides immunity at the stage of the disease the individual is
   in. The expected delay is the sum of the expected delays in 1) delivering the vaccine (e.g.,
   delay incurred in getting the health worker’s appointment) and 2) developing immunity after
   the vaccine is administered. After these individuals are vaccinated and develop immunity, they
   transition to preempted state Q (the terms in black in the CEDE below); this process is denoted
   by the yellow arrows in Fig 3. The fraction of individuals who are vaccinated and are in cluster
   i at time t is Qi (t).
        The resulting CEDE, for the evolution of the states of the immunocompetent individuals, is
   shown in (16) - (31) with the coefficients defined in Tables 7 and 8 and additional parameters
   defined in Table 10.
                                                                   46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                         perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                         Table 10: Parameters description (vaccine only scenario)
                       Parameters           Description of parameters
                            θ               Preemption rate for immunocompetent susceptibles
                            θ̃              Preemption rate for immunodeficient susceptibles
                           π                preemption rate for immunocompetent early incubators
                           π̃               Preemption rate for immunodeficient early incubators
                               Xn                            Xn                                            Xn                    X n
            Ṡahi (t)   =  −       Sahi (t)φji (t)Ij (t) +       Sbhi (t)αji Xj (t) − Sahi (t)θi +               Sahj (t)κij −        Sahi (t)κji          (16)
                               j=1                           j=1                                          j=1                    i=1
                                                                                                          j6=i                   i6=j
                               Xn                        X n                          X n                     X n
            Ṡbhi (t)   =  −       Sbhi (t)φji Ij (t) −       Sbhi (t)αji Xj (t) +         Sbhj (t)κij −            Sbhi (t)κji                            (17)
                               j=1                       j=1                          j=1                     i=1
                                                                                      j6=i                    i6=j
                           X n                        X n                                                              Xn                  Xn
           Ȧahi (t)    =        Sahi (t)φji Ij (t) +       Abhi (t)αji Xj (t) − Aahi (t)πi − Aahi (t)ω +                  Aahj (t)κij −       Aahi (t)κji (18)
                           j=1                        j=1                                                             j=1                 i=1
                                                                                                                      j6=i                i6=j
                           X n                        Xn                                          X n                      X n
           Ȧbhi (t)    =        Sbhi (t)φji Ij (t) −       Abhi (t)αji Xj (t) − Abhi (t)ω +            Abhj (t)κij −           Abhi (t)κji                (19)
                           j=1                        j=1                                         j=1                      i=1
                                                                                                  j6=i                     i6=j
                                                          Xn                            Xn                       Xn
           Ḃahi (t)    =  Aahi (t)ω − Bahi (t)βi +           Bbhi (t)αji Xj (t) +           Bahj (t)κij −            Bahi (t)κji                          (20)
                                                          j=1                          j=1                      i=1
                                                                                       j6=i                     i6=j
                                                        Xn                            Xn                      X n
           Ḃbhi (t)    =  Abhi (t)ω − Bbhi (t)β −           Bbhi (t)αji Xj (t) +          Bbhj (t)κij −            Bbhi (t)κji                            (21)
                                                        j=1                          j=1                     i=1
                                                                                     j6=i                     i6=j
                                                        Xn                           X n                     X n
            Ṗahi (t)   =  Bahi (t)β − Pahi (t)γ +           Pbhi (t)αji Xj (t) +         Pahj (t)κij −            Pahi (t)κji                             (22)
                                                        j=1                         j=1                      i=1
                                                                                     j6=i                    i6=j
                                                        Xn                       Xn                     X n
            Ṗbhi (t)   =  Bbhi (t)β − Pbhi (t)γ −           Pbhi (t)αji Xj +         Pbhj (t)κij −           Pbhi (t)κji                                  (23)
                                                       j=1                      j=1                     i=1
                                                                                j6=i                    i6=j
                                                       X n                       Xn                      Xn
           Ċahi (t)    =  Pahi (t)γ − Cbhi (t)ρ +           Cbhi (t)αji Xj +         Cbhj (t)κij −            Cbhi (t)κji                                 (24)
                                                       j=1                      j=1                     i=1
                                                                                j6=i                    i6=j
                                                       Xn                       X n                     X n
            Ċbhi (t)   =  Pbhi (t)γ − Cbhi (t)ρ −           Cbhi (t)αji Xj +         Cbhj (t)κij −           Cbhi (t)κji                                  (25)
                                                       j=1                      j=1                     i=1
                                                                                j6=i                    i6=j
                                                        Xn                           Xn                      X n
           Ėahi (t)    =  Cahi (t)ρ − Eahi (t)δ +           Ebhi (t)αji Xj (t) +         Eahj (t)κij −             Eahi (t)κji                            (26)
                                                       j=1                          j=1                      i=1
                                                                                    j6=i                     i6=j
                                                       Xn                           X n                     X n
            Ėbhi (t)   =  Cbhi (t)ρ − Ebhi (t)δ −           Ebhi (t)αji Xj (t) +         Ebhj (t)κij −           Ebhi (t)κji                              (27)
                                                       j=1                          j=1                     i=1
                                                                                    j6=i                    i6=j
                                                   Xn                         X n                     X n
           Ṙahi (t)    =  (1 − σ)Eahi (t)δ +          Rbhi (t)αji Xj (t) +         Rahj (t)κij −           Rahi (t)κji                                    (28)
                                                  j=1                         j=1                     i=1
                                                                              j6=i                    i6=j
                                                  Xn                      X n                    X n
           Ṙbhi (t)    =  (1 − σ)Ebhi (t)δ +         Rbhi (t)αji Xj +          Rbhj (t)κij −          Rbhi (t)κji                                         (29)
                                                  j=1                     j=1                    i=1
                                                                          j6=i                   i6=j
                                                                                          Xn                      X n
               Q̇i (t)  =  Sahi (t)θi + Saci (t)θ˜i + Aahi (t)πi + Aaci (t)π˜i +              Qbhj (t)κij −            Qbhi (t)κji                         (30)
                                                                                         j=1                      i=1
                                                                                         j6=i                     i6=j
               Ḋi (t)  =  σEahi (t)δ + σ̃Eaci (t)δ + σEbhi (t)δ + σ̃Ebci (t)δ                                                                             (31)
                                                                              47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
        The differential equations for the evolution of the states of the immunodeficient individuals
   is identical to those of the immunocompetent individuals, as seen in equations (1) to (12) in
   Appendix A.1. Specifically, the equation for Ṡaci (t) may be obtained from equation (16) for
   Ṡahi (t), as the equation (2) for Ṡci (t) followed from equation (1) for Ṡhi (t). The only differences
   in the equations for the immunodeficient individuals are that 1) they have lower preemption
   rates than the immunocompetent ones as they can avail of different vaccines that act slower
   and 2) those in late rash stage die while the corresponding immunocompetent ones can recover.
   Specifically, the immunodeficient cooperative susceptibles (respectively early incubators) that
   are in cluster i develop immunity at rate θ̃i (π̃i respectively). The preemption rates are de-
   fined as for the immunocompetent ones, but have lower value as the immunodeficient ones can
   only receive vaccines that provide immunity after multiple shots administered after specified
   gaps. Thus, in general, θ˜i < θi and π̃i < πi . Note that the recovery and death rates for the
   immunodeficient and the immunocompetent ones are as in Table 8.
        We now explain the terms in (16) - (31). The second terms in (16) through (29) (the terms in
   orange) are quadratic terms which represent the transformation of non-cooperative individuals
   to cooperative ones through exchange of opinion with cooperative individuals - refer to the black
   arrows in Fig 3. Since the change of opinion increases (respectively decreases) the cooperatives
   (respectively noncooperatives), the second terms in the equations for the cooperatives (e.g.,
   (16)) are positive and the second terms for the non-cooperatives (e.g., (17)) are negative.
        The terms θi Sahi (t) and πi Aahi (t) (the terms in black) in (30) represent the vaccination
   of immunocompetent cooperative susceptibles and early incubators. Vaccination reduces the
   number of susceptibles and early incubators by transforming them to the vaccinated state. Thus,
   these terms are subtracted from (16) and (18) respectively and added to (30). The second and
   fourth terms of equation (30) correspond to the immunization of immunodeficient cooperative
   susceptibles and early incubators.
        The rest of the terms represent the phenomena modeled in equations (1) to (14) in Ap-
   pendix A.1. Specifically, the first terms in (16), and (18) (the terms in green) are quadratic
   terms which represent the spread of the disease to the susceptibles due to interaction with the
   infectious individuals and the subsequent transformation of the susceptibles to early incubators
   - refer to the yellow arrows in Fig 3. The disease dynamics is similar for the cooperatives and
   non-cooperatives. The last two terms in (16), (18), (20), (22), (24), (26), (28) (the terms in
   blue) are linear terms representing mobility of individuals across clusters. The dead individuals
                                                                   48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   do not move, so we do not see such terms in (31). All other terms in (16), (18), (20), (22),
   (24), (26) (the terms in red) represent the natural progression of the disease - refer to the blue
   arrows in Fig 3.
        Different types of vaccines and immunization policies may be captured through appropriate
   choices of the values of θi , θ̃i , πi , π̃i . A policy choice may for example be to administer the vaccine
   at a higher rate in certain clusters. Such policies may be represented by selecting a higher value
   for the corresponding parameters. Some vaccines may act faster than others leading again to
   higher values for the above parameters. Finally, when the availability of the vaccine is finite, the
   values of these parameters may be made dependent on time, and as the supply of the vaccine
   is exhausted, the parameters may be chosen to be 0.
        Finally, the solution of the CEDE provides the spatio-temporal distribution for the spread
   of the disease and opinion and the impact of the countermeasure (vaccine). These are captured
   in the fraction of individuals who (1) are dead and are in cluster i at time t (Di (t)), (2)
   have recovered and are in cluster i at time t ((Rahi + Rbhi )(t)), (3) are preempted (that is,
   vaccinated) and are in cluster i at time t (Qi (t)), (4) are susceptible and are in cluster i at time
   t ((Saci + Sahi + Sbci + Sbhi )(t)), (5) are infected and are in cluster i at time t ((Paci + Pahi +
   Pbci + Pbhi + Caci + Cahi + Cbci + Cbhi + Eaci + Eahi + Ebci + Ebhi )(t)), (6) are contagious and
   are in cluster i at time t ((Saci + Sahi + Sbci + Sbhi + Aaci + Aahi + Abci + Abhi + Baci + Bahi +
   Bbci + Bbhi + Paci + Pahi + Pbci + Pbhi + Caci + Cahi + Cbci + Cbhi + Eaci + Eahi + Ebci + Ebhi )(t)).
   A.4      Both drug and vaccine
   In this case, individuals may be preempted through drug or vaccine. Thus, those preempted
   may either be cooperative or non-cooperatives. Thus, we classify the preempted individuals into
   cooperatives, Qa and non-cooperatives, Qb (Fig 4). The cooperatives among the susceptibles
   and early incubators can transition to the state Qa after developing immunity through drug
   or vaccine. Transition from the rest of the states (other than recovered or dead) to Qa or Qb
   occurs through reception of the drug. Qa , Qb needs to be indexed by the clusters the individuals
   inhabit.
                                                                   49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                      Table 11: Parameters description (both drug and vaccine)
      Parameters         Description of parameters
            Θ            Rate of preemption for immunocompetent cooperative susceptibles through
                         the reception of the drug or the vaccine
            Θ̃           Rate of preemption for immunodeficient cooperative susceptibles through the
                         reception of the drug or the vaccine
            Π            Rate of preemption for immunocompetent cooperative early incubators
                         through the reception of the drug or the vaccine.
            Π̃           Rate of preemption for immunodeficient early incubators through the reception
                         of the drug or the vaccine.
            Θ̄           Rate of preemption for immunocompetent non-cooperative susceptibles
                         through the reception of the drug or the vaccine
            Θ̂           Rate of preemption for immunodeficient non-cooperative susceptibles through
                         the reception of the drug or the vaccine
            Π̄           Rate of preemption for immunocompetent non-cooperative early incubators
                         through the reception of the drug or the vaccine.
            Π̂           Rate of preemption for immunodeficient non-cooperative early incubators
                         through the reception of the drug or the vaccine.
            τ            Rate of preemption for prodromals and non-cooperatives among susceptibles
                         through reception of drugs
            µ
                         Rate of preemption for patients with rash through reception of drugs.
        We use the parameters as defined in Appendix A.3 with some of the modifications described
   in Table 11. Thus, the CEDE for both drug and vaccine scenario can be obtained from (16) to
   (29) by adding two equations, (32) and (33) below, that model the transitions to Qa , Qb and
   modifying (16) to (29) to reflect this transition and the distinction between Qa , Qb .
                          X n 
          Q̇ai (t) =              Sahi (t)Θi + Saci (t)Θ̃i + Aahi (t)Πi + Aaci (t)Π̃i + Paci (t)τi + Pahi (t)τi
                           i=1
                          + Caci (t)µi + Cahi (t)µi + Baci (t)τi + Bahi (t)τi + Aaci (t)τi + Aahi (t)τi )                  (32)
                          X n 
          Q̇bi (t) =              Sbci (t)Θ̂i + Sbhi (t)Θ̄i + Abci (t)Π̂i + Abhi (t)Π̄i + Pbci (t)µi + Pbhi (t)µi
                           i=1
                          + Cbci (t)µi + Cbhi (t)µi + Bbci (t)τi + Bbhi (t)τi + Abci (t)τi + Abhi (t)τi )                  (33)
   We now describe the modifications in (16) to (29). The expression for Xi (t) in Appendix
   (A.3) need to have Qai (t) instead of Qi (t). The terms Θi Sahi (t), Θ̃i Saci (t), πi Aahi (t), π̃i Aaci (t),
   Sbci (t)Θ̂i , Sbhi (t)Θ̄i , Abci (t)Π̂i , and Abhi (t)Π̄i represent the preemption of individuals by either
   vaccine or drugs for individuals in cluster i in their respective states. In addition, τi Pahi (t),
   τi Paci (t), τi Pbhi (t), τi Pbci (t), µi Cahi (t), µi Caci (t), µi Cbhi (t), µi Cbci (t), µi Eahi (t), µi Eaci (t), τi Bahi (t),
                                                                   50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   τi Baci (t), τi Bbhi (t), and τi Bbci (t) represent preemption by drug only for individuals in cluster i
   in the respective states. Due to these preemptions, (16) through (27) will respectively be decre-
   mented by Sahi Θi , Sbhi Θ̂i , Saci (t)Θ̃i , Sbci (t)Θ̂i , Aahi Πi , Abci (t)Π̂i , Aaci (t)τi , Abhi (t)Π̄i , Bahi τi ,
   Bbhi τi , Pahi τi , Pbhi τi , Cahi µi , and Cbhi µi .
        Here the suffices a, b represent the two opinions. Those with suffix a convert those with
   suffix b. To capture the scenario that cooperatives convert the non-cooperatives, we consider
   those with suffix a as cooperative, and those with suffix b as non-cooperative. To capture the
   scenario that non-cooperatives convert the cooperatives, we reverse the designations, that is,
   those with suffix a are non-cooperatives, and those with suffix b are cooperatives. Note that
   functionally the difference between the cooperatives and non-cooperatives is that the former
   opt for vaccination while the latter does not. The vaccinations can be effective only if the
   individuals are susceptible or in early incubation stage. Thus, in these states, the cooperatives
   can be preempted through either drugs or vaccines, while the non-cooperatives can only be
   preempted through drugs (that is, if they are eligible for drugs depending on the administering
   policies). Thus, the preemption rates of the cooperatives are different from the non-cooperatives
   in these stages, and that is the only functional difference. Thus, interchanging the preemption
   rates of the states with suffix a with those of the corresponding ones with suffix b will switch
   their roles as cooperatives and non-cooperatives. We describe how the preemption rates are
   chosen in Section B of Appendix.
        Finally, various policy choices for countermeasure application may be incorporated through
   appropriate selection of the parameters in Table 11, similar to the connections made in the
   concluding paragraphs of Appendices A.2 and A.3. In addition, the solution of the CEDE
   provides the spatio-temporal distribution for the spread of the disease and opinion and the
   impact of the countermeasure (vaccine and drug). These are captured in fraction of individuals
   who (1) are dead and are in cluster i at time t (Di (t)), (2) have recovered and are in cluster
   i at time t ((Rahi + Rbhi )(t)), (3) are preempted (that is, vaccinated or administered drugs)
   and are in cluster i at time t ((Qai + Qbi )(t)), (4) are susceptible and are in cluster i at time
   t ((Saci + Sahi + Sbci + Sbhi )(t)), (5) are infected and are in cluster i at time t ((Paci + Pahi +
   Pbci + Pbhi + Caci + Cahi + Cbci + Cbhi + Eaci + Eahi + Ebci + Ebhi )(t)), (6) are contagious and
   are in cluster i at time t ((Saci + Sahi + Sbci + Sbhi + Aaci + Aahi + Abci + Abhi + Baci + Bahi +
   Bbci + Bbhi + Paci + Pahi + Pbci + Pbhi + Caci + Cahi + Cbci + Cbhi + Eaci + Eahi + Ebci + Ebhi )(t)).
                                                                   51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   B       Parameter estimation
   B.1      Estimation of parameters used in all the scenarios
   We first estimate the parameters that occur in all four scenarios ((1) no countermeasure (2) drug
   only (3) vaccine only (4) both drug and vaccine) we have considered so far, namely the disease
   progression parameters. These parameters have been described in Table 8. Typically, the early
   incubation phase for smallpox lasts for 7 days and the late incubation phase for 5 days [14].
   Assuming that each phase has an exponentially distributed random duration, 1/ω, 1/β are the
   expected durations in these two phases. Thus, ω = 1/7, β = 1/5. Typically a patient is in
   prodromal phase for 3 days [14, 15]. Thus, as for the incubation phases, γ = 1/3. Typically,
   the early and late rash periods last for 3 and 7 days respectively [14]. Therefore, as before,
   ρ = 1/3, δ = 1/7. On average, 30% of the infected immunocompetent individuals die of the
   disease [14,15]. Thus, σ = 0.3. According to [13], immunodeficient individuals are not expected
   to recover from smallpox. Thus, σ̃ = 1.
        We now compute the disease spread rate described in Table 7. We assume φi,j = 0 if i 6= j,
   that is, there is no direct physical contact and therefore no direct spread of disease between
   people inhabiting different clusters. The basic reproductive number, R0 , is defined as the average
   number of secondary infections caused by a single typical infected individual among a completely
   susceptible population. [11, 14] estimated R0 for smallpox to be 6.9. We estimate φi,i to obtain
   R0 = 6.9. Following the methodology in [20, 32], we get φi,i = 0.00173.
        Note that the infection indirectly spreads between clusters due to mobility of individuals
   across clusters. Mobility rate is described in the methods section and Table 7. We do not
   assume any specific value of the mobility rate between clusters but vary it across a range of
   values as mobility rates heavily depend on the scenario under consideration.
   B.2      Estimation of parameters related to delivery of drugs
   We now estimate the parameters related to the preemption of infected individuals by drugs (refer
   to Appendix A.2), these will also be used to compute the parameters in both drug and vaccine
   scenarios. First, note that the stage of the disease in which an individual can be administered a
   drug depends on the drug administering policy. We assume that in a state in which an individual
   is allowed to receive a drug, he needs to wait for an exponentially distributed random time after
   which he is preempted, that is, he is administered the drug and develops the ability to thwart
                                                                   52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the disease. Let ε be the parameter of this exponential process. We also assumed that the wait
   time for different individuals is independent.
        There are n individuals in all. The first individual who is preempted waits for the minimum
   time among n. From the theory of exponential distributions, the minimum time is exponentially
   distributed with parameter nε, and has expectation 1/nε. The second person to be preempted
   has the minimum additional wait time among the remaining n − 1. Similarly, this additional
   wait time is exponentially distributed with parameter (n − 1)ε and expectation 1/(n − 1)ε.
   Similarly, the additional wait time for the third person (after the second person is preempted)
                                                                                             1
   is exponential with parameter (n − 2)ε, and has expectation                           (n−2)ε .    This continues until the
   last person whose expected additional wait time is 1ε . Therefore, the total expected time for n
   individuals to be preempted is,
                                               1           1              1               1
                                                  +               +             + ... +
                                              nε (n − 1)ε (n − 2)ε                        ε
                                                                                                     
                                     1 1           1          1            1            1 1
                                 =           +           +          +          + ... + + + 1
                                     ε n n−1 n−2 n−3                                    3 2
                                                      n
                                                  1X1           1
                                               =             ≈ (ln(n) + constant)
                                                  ε       k     ε
                                                    k=1
   The last expression follows from the Harmonic series (number) approximation. We obtain ε by
   equating this expression to the total wait times required to develop immunity as reported in
   the literature for cities. [14] and [33] state that the CDC’s Cities Readiness Initiative sets as
   a goal that cities should be able to distribute antibiotics to their entire population within 48
   hours. However, it is uncertain how many large cities with a population similar to our model are
   prepared to meet this goal. Therefore, similar to [14], we consider a mass antiviral distribution
   timetable of 4 days. We assumed that an individual can thwart the disease 2 days on average
   after he starts receiving the drug. We also assume that the constant in the Harmonic number
   approximation is negligible. Therefore, ε = ln (n) /(4 + 2). Considering n = 107 , we have
   ε = 2.6863.
        According to [14], drug treatment before the onset of rash offers 99% protection against
   mortality, and drug treatment 3 days post-onset of rash offers 80% protection against mortality.
   Thus, we estimate the preemption rate for susceptibles, incubators, and prodromals as τ =
   ε × 0.99 = 2.6594 (if the drug administering policy administers the drug to them), and the
   preemption rate for those in the early rash stage as µ = ε ∗ 0.8 = 2.1490. We assume that the
                                                                   53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   drug is ineffective in the late rash stage.
        All policies for administering drugs use µ = 2.1490 as computed above. But τ will be 0 for
   some states in which the drug is not administered depending on the policy under consideration.
   Note that policy 1 administers drugs to only the patients with rashes. Thus, under policy 1,
   τ = 0. In policy 2, once the number of cases in a given cluster exceeds a certain threshold,
   drug is administered to anyone with fever (prodrome) or rashes, and τ = 2.6594 for prodromals;
   otherwise, τ = 0 as in policy 1. In policy 3, drugs are administered to everyone in a given cluster
   once the number of cases in the cluster exceeds a certain threshold, otherwise only those with
   rash receive the drug. Thus, once the number of cases in a cluster exceed a certain threshold,
   τ = 2.6594, otherwise τ = 0.
   B.3      Estimating the parameters pertaining to immunization
   We now consider the additional parameters in the vaccine only scenario above and beyond
   those estimated in Appendix B.1. Refer to Table 10. According, to [14, 16, 20], it would take
   approximately 10 days on average for cooperative individuals to get their shots in case of mass
   vaccination against an epidemic in a large U.S. city. The immunocompetent individuals are
   given the live vaccine (ACAM2000) which provides immediate immunity if taken during the
   susceptible stage [26]. Finally, according to [14], vaccination within the early incubation stage
   provides an 80% chance of disease prevention. Now, following the methodology in Appendix B.2,
         ln(107 )                              ln(107 )∗0.8
   θ=      10     = 1.6118 and π =                 10       = 1.2894 (as in Appendix B.2, we consider that there
   are n = 107 individuals in the city under consideration). Next, we consider immunodeficient
   individuals. They receive the Modified Vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) vaccines [11,14] that takes
   two-shots 30 days apart to provide immunity [17]. Thus θ̃ = ln(107 )/(10 + 30) = 0.4030, and
   π̃ = ln(107 ) ∗ 0.8/(10 + 30) = 0.3224.
   B.4      Modifying the estimation for the vaccine and drug scenario
   In this scenario, individuals can be preempted through either drug or vaccine. We estimate the
   parameters in Table 11. We first consider the default case, that is, the cooperatives convert the
   non-cooperatives, in this, the states with a in the suffix are cooperatives and those with b in
   the suffix are the non-cooperatives. Vaccines are effective only when they are administered to
   individuals in susceptible or early incubation stage. Thus, preemption in later stages can only
   be through drugs. Referring to Table 11, 1/τ and 1/µ can therefore be directly obtained from
                                                                   54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the estimation strategy in Appendix B.2, i.e., τ = 2.6594 and µ = 2.1490.
        The estimation of other parameters in Table 11 will depend on the policy for administering
   the drugs. Note that in policy 1, drugs are administered to only patients with rash. Thus,
   a susceptible or early incubator can be preempted only when he receives the vaccine. Thus
   Θ, Θ̃, Π and Π̃ can be obtained directly from the respective values of θ, θ̃, π, π̃ estimated in
   Appendix B.3. Specifically Θ = 1.6118, Θ̃ = 0.4030, Π = 1.2894 and Π̃ = 0.3224. And, since
   the non-cooperatives do not receive vaccine, Θ̄ = Θ̂ = Π̄ = Π̂ = 0.
        In policy 2, once the number of cases in a given cluster exceeds a certain threshold, drug is
   administered to anyone with fever (prodrome) or rash. Thus, a susceptible or early incubator
   can be preempted only when he receives the vaccine, and Θ, Θ̃, Π, Π̃, Θ̄, Θ̂, Π̄, and Π̂ can be
   estimated identical to the previous paragraph. The drug delivery parameter in the prodrome
   stage can be estimated as in the first paragraph, i.e., τ = 2.6594.
        In policy 3, drugs are administered to everyone in a given cluster once the number of cases in
   the cluster exceeds a certain threshold. Thus, in this case, susceptibles and early incubators may
   either be preempted through drugs or vaccines. We assume that any such immunocompetent
   individual is preempted through vaccination after an exponentially distributed wait time with
   parameter θ, and is preempted through drug after an exponentially distributed wait time with
   parameter τ . Thus, he is preempted after a minimum of the two wait times (if he receives
   the drug earlier than the vaccine he will be preempted through drug and vice versa). When
   the two exponential processes are independent, their minimum is an exponential process with
   parameter Θ, where Θ = θ + τ . Now from the estimations in Appendix A.4 and first 4 rows of
   Table 11, Θ = 1.6118 + 2.6594 = 4.2712. For an immunodeficient individual the parameter for
   the vaccine is θ̃ = 0.4030 (from Appendix B.3). Thus, Θ̃ = 0.4030 + 2.6594 = 3.0624. Similarly,
   Π = π + τ = 1.2894 + 2.6594 = 3.9488, and the Π̃ = π̃ + τ = 0.3224 + 2.6594 = 2.9818. For
   late incubation, preemption can happen only through drug delivery, and the preemption rate
   as estimated in the first paragraph is τ = 2.6594. The non-cooperative susceptibles and early
   incubators can only be preempted through drugs. Thus Θ̄ = 2.6594, Θ̂ = 2.6594, Π̄ = 2.6594,
   Π̂ = 2.6594.
        Finally, we consider the case that the non-cooperatives convert the cooperatives. As ex-
   plained in Appendix A.4, here the states with suffix a are the non-cooperatives and those with
   suffix b are the cooperatives. Since the functional difference between these two are in the pre-
   emption rates, the preemption rates of the states with suffix a need to be interchanged with
                                                                   55

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211680.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                               perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
   the corresponding ones with suffix b. Note that only the susceptibles and early incubators can
   receive vaccines, all the rest are preempted only through drugs and therefore their preemption
   rates are the same regardless of whether they are cooperatives or non-cooperatives. Thus, only
   the preemption rates of the cooperative susceptibles (respectively, early incubators) need to be
   interchanged with the corresponding non-cooperative susceptibles (respectively, early incuba-
   tors). That is, values of Θ, Θ̄ need to be exchanged. Similarly, values of 1) Θ̃, Θ̂, 2) Π, Π̄, 3)
   Π̃, Π̂ need to be exchanged.
                                                                   56
