medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
      (), 1–26                                                                                                                                :
                                   Evaluating Short-term Forecast among
        Different Epidemiological Models under a Bayesian Framework
                          Qiwei Li∗1 , Tejasv Bedi†1 , Guanghua Xiao2 , and Yang Xie2
     1
       Department of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
         2
           Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
                                                           Dallas, TX 75390, USA
                                                                  Abstract
     Forecasting of COVID-19 daily confirmed cases has been one of the several challenges posed
     on the governments and health sectors on a global scale. To facilitate informed public health
     decisions, the concerned parties rely on short-term daily projections generated via predictive
     modeling. We calibrate stochastic variants of growth models and the standard SIR model into
     one Bayesian framework to evaluate their short-term forecasts. In summary, it was noted that
     none of the models proved to be golden standards across all the regions in their entirety, while
     all outperformed ARIMA in a predictive capacity as well as in terms of interpretability.
     Keywords Bayesian hierarchical modeling; Stochastic growth model; Stochastic SIR model;
     Time-series cross-validation.
     1      Introduction
     COVID-19, a respiratory disease caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, has rapidly
     become an ongoing global pandemic. It has become the leading cause of death in the United
     States (U.S.) and is still spreading fast in almost every other country. Given the extent of the
     physical and economic suffering caused by the pandemic, there is an urgent public health need
     to better predict the spread of COVID-19 both locally and nationwide. Since the emergence of
     the COVID-19 outbreak, several predictive modeling approaches have been proposed to predict
     trends of the disease to come up with effective policies and measures to minimize casualties.
     Broadly speaking, there are five types of approaches to forecasting the number of new cases
         ∗
           Corresponding author. Email: qiwei.li@utdallas.edu
         †
           The author contributed equally with the first author to this work
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     2                              Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     or the expected total mortality caused by the COVID-19: 1) time-series forecasting such as
     autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) (see e.g. Elmousalami and Hassanien, 2020;
     Perone, 2020); 2) growth curve fitting based on the generalized Richards curve (GRC) or its
     special cases (see e.g. Batista, 2020; COVID et al., 2020; Roosa et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2020;
     Wu et al., 2020); 3) compartmental modeling based on the susceptible-infectious-removed (SIR)
     models or its derivations (see e.g. Fanelli and Piazza, 2020; Kucharski et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020;
     Liu et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020; Pei and Shaman, 2020; Song et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Wang
     et al., 2020; Yamana et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020); 4) agent-based modeling (see e.g. Gomez
     et al., 2020); 5) artificial intelligence (AI)-inspired modeling (see e.g. Bullock et al., 2020; Hu
     et al., 2020; Distante et al., 2020; Vaishya et al., 2020).
           Each type of approach, either being deterministic or stochastic, has its own strengths. For
     instance, the ARIMA model combines the regressive process and the moving average, allowing
     to predict a given time series by considering its own lags and lagged forecast error. Curve fitting
     approaches (also known as phenomenological modeling) fit a curve to the observed number of
     cumulative confirmed cases or deaths with a certain error structure (e.g. Gaussian or Poisson),
     enabling meaningful interpretation through curve parameters while accounting for measurement
     errors. Compartmental modeling (also known as mechanistic modeling) approaches consider a
     partition of the population into compartments corresponding to different stages of the disease and
     characterize the disease transmission dynamics by the flow of individuals through compartments.
     Agent-based modeling approaches use computer simulations to study the dynamic interactions
     among the agents (e.g., people in epidemiology) and between an agent and the environment.
     AI-based modeling approaches usually embeds time series, clustering, and forecasting under
     one roof, resulting in an exemplary predictive performance. There has been a growing debate
     amongst researchers over model performance evaluation and finding the best model appropriate
     for a certain feature (cases, deaths, etc.), a particular regional level (county, state, country, etc.),
     and more. Fair evaluation and comparison of the output of different forecasting methods have
     remained an open question (Tabataba et al., 2017) sine models vary in their complexity in terms
     of the number of variables and parameters that characterize the dynamic states of the system.
           Although a comparison of predictive models for infectious diseases has been discussed in the
     literature, to our best knowledge, no existing work systematically compares their performances,
     particularly with the same amount of data information. In this paper, we calibrate stochastic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                                3
     variants of six different growth models (i.e. logistic, generalized logistic, Richards, generalized
     Richards, Bertalanffy, and Gompertz) and the standard SIR model, all of which can be specified
     by an ordinary differential equation(ODE), into one flexible Bayesian modeling framework. The
     main reason that why we limit our analysis to these two modeling approaches is that they can
     not only make both short and long-term forecasts, but also provide useful insights to understand
     the disease dynamics of COVID-19. The growth models provide an empirical approach without
     a specific basis on the mechanisms that give rise to the observed patterns in the cumulative
     infection data, while the compartmental models incorporate key mechanisms involved in the
     disease transmission dynamics in order to explain patterns in the observed data.
           In our Bayesian modeling framework, the bottom-level is a negative binomial model that
     directly models infection count data and accounts for the over-dispersed observational errors. The
     top-level is from a choice of growth or compartmental models that characterizes a certain disease
     transmission dynamic through ODE(s). The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm is
     used to sample from the posterior distribution. The short-term forecasts are made from the
     resulting MCMC samples. We perform the rolling-origin cross-validation procedure to compare
     the prediction error of different stochastic models. In terms of regions, we consider the top 20
     countries in terms of confirmed case numbers for a country-level analysis. It is observed that
     1) as the models learned more and more data, the predictive performance improved in general
     for all the regions; 2) none of the models proved to be golden standards across all the regions
     in their entirety, while the ARIMA model underperformed all stochastic models proposed in the
     paper. Besides, we offer a graphical interface that allows users to interact with the future trends
     of COVID-19 at different geographic locations in the U.S. based on the real-time COVID-19
     data. This daily updated web portal is currently being used to inform local policy-makers and
     the general public.
           The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a variety of stochastic
     epidemiological models under a unified Bayesian framework. The detailed MCMC algorithms,
     posterior inference, and forecasting procedures are described in Section 3. Section 4 mainly
     discusses an algorithmic approach to measure and compare the predictive performance of the
     proposed models and the benchmark ARIMA model. Besides, we analyze the COVID-19 data
     for the top 20 countries with the most confirmed cases, including the U.S. Finally, we conclude
     with remarks in Section 5 and provide information about implementations in Section 6.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     4                              Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     2      The Bayesian Framework
     In this section, we present a bi-level Bayesian framework for predicting new daily confirmed
     cases during a pandemic in a closed population. Section 2.2 introduces the bottom level, which
     directly models the observed counts while accounting for measurement errors. Section 2.3 and
     2.4 describe two choices of the top level, characterizing the epidemic dynamics through growth
     curve or compartmental trajectories, respectively. Before introducing the main components, we
     summarize the possibly observable data as follows.
     2.1      Data notations
     Let C = (C1 , . . . , CT ) be a sequence of cumulative confirmed case numbers observed at T suc-
     cessive equally spaced points in time (e.g. day) in a specific region, where each entry Ct ∈ N for
     t = 1, . . . , T . let C0 be the initial value and Ċ = (Ċ1 , . . . , ĊT ) be the lag one difference of C,
     where Ċ1 = C1 − C0 and each following entry Ċt = Ct − Ct−1 , t = 2, . . . , T , i.e. the difference
     between two adjacent observations. In the analysis and modeling of a series of infectious disease
     daily report data, the time-series data could also be the cumulative death numbers, recovery
     case numbers, or their sums, denoted by D (Death), E (Recovery), and R (Removed), and their
     corresponding new case numbers, denoted by Ḋ, Ė, and Ṙ. Assuming a closed population with
     size N , the time-series data could also be the number of susceptible people, denoted by S, with
     each entry St = N − Ct . In reality, only confirmed cases and deaths are reported in most regions.
     Recovery data are not available or suffer from under-reporting issues even if existing. Thus, our
     main goal is to make predictions of the future trend of an infectious diseases only based on the
     confirmed cases C.
     2.2      Bottom-level: Time-series count generating process
     We consider the new case number observed at time t, i.e. Ċt , are sampled from a negative
     binomial (NB) model,
                                            Ċt    ∼      NB(g(Ct−1 , Θ), φ),        t = 2, . . . , T
     as it automatically accounts for measurement errors and uncertainties associated with the counts.
     Here, we use NB(µ, φ), µ, φ > 0 to denote a NB distribution with expectation µ and dispersion
     1/φ. We assume this stochastic process is a Markov process, where the present state (at time

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                                5
     t) depends only upon its previous state (at time t − 1). Therefore, the NB mean is a function,
     denoted by g(·), of the case number observed at time t − 1, characterized by a set of inter-
     pretable/uninterpretable model parameters Θ. With this parameterization, the NB variance is
     µ + µ2 /φ, indicating that φ controls the variance of measurement error. A small value leads to
     a large variance to mean ratio, while a large value approaching infinity reduces the NB model
     to a Poisson model with the same mean and variance. The probability mass function of a NB
                                                      φ        Y
                                      Γ(Y +φ)       φ          λ
     random variable Y is Y !Γ(φ) λ+φ                         λ+φ     . Thus, we can write the full data likelihood as
                                                 T                                     φ                     Ċt
                                                Y   Γ(Ċt + φ)              φ                      g(Ct−1 , Θ)
                     f (C|Θ, φ)         =                                                                             .           (1)
                                                      Ċt !Γ(φ)      g(Ct−1 , Θ) + φ            g(Ct−1 , Θ) + φ
                                                t=2
     For the prior distribution of the dispersion parameter φ, we choose a gamma distribution, φ ∼
     Ga(aφ , bφ ). We recommend small values, such as aφ = bφ = 0.001, for a non-informative setting
     (Gelman et al., 2006). Note that the proposed framework can be also viewed as a stochastic
     discrete-time state-space model with a negative binomial error structure. The proposed Bayesian
     models, on average, mimics the epidemic dynamics and is more flexible than those deterministic
     epidemiological models, as it accounts for measurement error and has the potential to incorporate
     existing information into the prior structure of Θ.
     2.3      Top-level I: Growth model
     We first discuss the choices of g(·) when implementing growth models. The development of a
     variety of growth curves originates from population dynamics (Haberman, 1998) and growth
     of biological systems (Werker and Jaggard, 1997; Desta et al., 1999; Kaps et al., 2000; Topal
     and Bolukbasi, 2008) modeling. A number of growth curves have been adapted in epidemiology
     for trend characterization and forecasting of an epidemic, such as the severe acute respiratory
     syndrome (SARS) (Hsieh et al., 2004; Hsieh, 2009), dengue fever (Hsieh and Ma, 2009; Hsieh and
     Chen, 2009), pandemic influenza A (H1N1) (Hsieh, 2010), Ebola virus disease (EVD) (Chowell
     et al., 2014; Pell et al., 2018), Zika fever (Chowell et al., 2016), and COVID-19 (Batista, 2020;
     Jia et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
           The underlying assumption is that the rate of growth of a population, organism, or infectious
     individuals eventually declines with size. The logistic curve (also known as sigmoid curve) is the
     simplest growth curve of continuous time u ∈ R. It is a non-negative symmetric ‘S’-shaped curve
                                                 K
     with equation y(u) =              1+exp(−λ(u−u0 )) ,    where u0 is the midpoint, K is the maximum value, and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     6                              Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     λ reflects the steepness of the curve. It is clear to see that y(u) approaches K when u → ∞,
     while it converges to zero when u → −∞. In fact, the continuous curve y(u) is the solution of a
     first-order non-linear ODE,                                                          
                                                    dy(u)                            y(u)
                                                                =     λy(u) 1 −
                                                      du                               K
     with condition y(u0 ) = K/2, where dy(u)/du can be interpreted as time-variant growth rate
     of the curve y. The above ODE reveals: 1) a non-negative growth rate, dy(u)/du > 0 as
     y(u) ∈ [0, K]; 2) an approximately exponential growth at the initial stage, y(u) ≈ exp(λu) as
     dy(u)/du ≈ λy(u) when y(u) → 0; 3) no growth at the final stage, y(u) dy(u)/du = 0 when
     y(u) → K; 4) a maximum growth rate of λK/4 occurred when y(u) = K/2, indicated by
     d2 y(u)/du2 = λdy(u)/du (1 − 2y(u)/K). Based on those curve characteristics, we can use the
     growth curve to characterize the trend of cumulative confirmed cases C.
           In this paper, we mainly consider a family of growth curves that are derived from the
     generalized Richards curve (GRC), which is the solution to the following ODE,
                                                                                    y(u) α
                                                                                          
                                                 dy(u)
                                                            = λy(u)p 1 −                          .                               (2)
                                                  du                                  K
     For those model-specific parameters in the context of epidemiology, K is the final epidemic size
     and should be an integer in the range of (0, N ], where N is the total population, λ ∈ R+ is the
     infectious rate at early epidemic stage, p ∈ (0, 1) is known as scaling of growth, and α ∈ R+
     controls the curve symmetry. As our observed infectious disease data are usually counts collected
     at successive equally spaced discrete time points, we formulate the NB mean function g(·) based
     on the discrete version of (2),
                                                                                                  Ct−1 α
                                                                                                        
                                                                                  p
                                   g(Ct−1 , Θ = {K, λ, p, α})           =     λCt−1     1−                   .                    (3)
                                                                                                    K
     Table 1 provides a list of g(·)’s for growth curves with their characteristics. All the listed growth
     curves have been utilized and discussed in previous epidemiological studies. We include all of
     those choices in our framework excluding the last one, which is based on the generalized growth
     curve (GGC), because it lacks the final epidemic size K specification.
           Without any existing information, we assume that K is from a discrete uniform distribution
     in its range and γ is from a gamma or a beta distribution, depending on the choice of growth
     curves. For instance, for both logistic and Gompertz curves, we assume γ ∼ Beta(aγ , bγ ), a
     natural modeling choice for parameter value restricted to the (0, 1) interval, and suggest to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                                7
                                   Table 1: List of g(·)’s functions based on growth curves
     Models           g(Ct−1 , Θ)                  Parameters Θ      Curve y(u)                          y(u) at the   Examples
                                                                                                         turning point
                                      Ct−1 α
                              h            i                                                                 1/α
                          p                                                                                  p
     GRC              λCt−1     1−     K
                                                   K ∈ N,            N/A                                   p+α
                                                                                                                     K Chowell et al. (2014, 2016)
                                                   λ ∈ R+ ,                                                            Wu et al. (2020)
                                                   p ∈ (0, 1),
                                                   α ∈ R+
                                      Ct−1 α
                              h            i                                                                 1/α
     Richards         λCt−1 1 −        K
                                                   K ∈ N,            K (1 + A exp(−λαu))−1/α ,               1
                                                                                                           1+α
                                                                                                                     K Hsieh et al. (2004)
                                                                                             α
                                                                                          K
                                                   λ ∈ R+ ,          where A = −1 +      y(0)
                                                                                                                       Hsieh and Chen (2009)
                                                   α ∈ R+                                                              Hsieh and Ma (2009)
                                                                                                                       Hsieh (2009, 2010)
                                         
                          p          Ct−1                                                                  p
     GLC              λCt−1     1−    K
                                                   K ∈ N,            N/A                                 p+1
                                                                                                               K       Chowell et al. (2019, 2020)
                                                   λ ∈ R+ ,                                                            Chowell (2017)
                                                   p ∈ (0, 1)                                                          Wu et al. (2020)
                                         
                                     Ct−1
     Logistic         λCt−1 1 −       K
                                                   K ∈ N,            K (1 + A exp(−λu))−1 ,              1
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                           K           Chowell et al. (2014)
                                                                                        K
                                                   λ ∈ (0, 1)        where A = −1 +    y(0)
                                                                                                                       Pell et al. (2018)
                                                                                                                       Batista (2020)
                                                                                                                       Jia et al. (2020)
                                                                                                                       Wu et al. (2020)
                          2
                                          1                                                    3
                                      Ct−1    3
     Bertalanffy          3
                      λCt−1 1 −        K
                                                   K ∈ N,            K 1 + A exp(− 13 γK −1/3 u) ,        8
                                                                                                         27
                                                                                                             K         Jia et al. (2020)
                                                                                           1/3
                                                                                       y(0)
                                                   λ ∈ R+            where A = 1 −      K
                                    K                                                                    1
     Gompertz         λCt−1 log   Ct−1
                                                   K ∈ N,            K exp(A exp(−λu)),                  e
                                                                                                           K           Jia et al. (2020)
                                                                                    y(0)
                                                   λ ∈ (0, 1)        where A = log   K
                          p
     GGC              λCt−1                        λ ∈ R+ ,          (A + λu(1 − p))1/(1−p)              N/A           Viboud et al. (2016)
                                                   p ∈ (0, 1)        where A = y(0)1−p                                 Chowell et al. (2016, 2020)
                                                                                                                       Chowell (2017)
                                                                                                                       Wu et al. (2020)
       Abbreviations: GRC is generalized Richards curve; GLC is generalized logistic curve; GGC is generalized growth curve.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     8                              Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     choose aγ = bγ = 1 for a uniform setting; otherwise, we place a gamma prior, i.e. γ ∼ Ga(aγ =
     0.001, bγ = 0.001). For the choice of GRC and generalized logistic curve (GLC), the prior of p
     is chose to be Beta(ap = 1, bp = 1). Lastly, we set α ∼ Ga(aγ = 0.001, bγ = 0.001) for fitting a
     GRC or Richards curve.
     2.4      Top-level II: Compartmental model
     The susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model was developed to simplify the mathematical mod-
     eling of human-to-human infectious diseases by Kermack and McKendrick (1927). It is a funda-
     mental compartmental model in epidemiology. At any given time u, each individual in a closed
     population with size N is assigned to three distinctive compartments with labels: susceptible
     (S), infectious (I), or removed (R, being either recovery or dead). The standard SIR model
     describes the flow of people from S to I and then from I to R by the following set of nonlinear
     ODEs:                                      
                                                    dS(u)
                                                              =     −βS(u) I(u)
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                    du                        N
                                                
                                                
                                                    dI(u)
                                                     du       =     βS(u) I(u)
                                                                            N − γI(u)
                                                                                                  ,
                                                
                                                
                                                    dR(u)
                                                
                                                               =     γI(u)
                                                
                                                
                                                      du
     where S(u), I(u), and R(u) are the population numbers of susceptible, infectious, and removed
     compartments measured in time u, subjecting to S(u) + I(u) + R(u) = N, ∀u. Another nature
     constraint is dS(u)/du + dI(u)/du + dR(u)/du = 0. Here, β ∈ R+ is the disease transmission
     rate, γ ∈ R+ is the removal rate, and their ratio R0 = β/γ is defined as the basic reproductive
     number. The rationale behind the first equation is that the number of new infections during an
     infinitesimal amount of time, −dS(u)/du, is equal to the number of susceptible people, S(u),
     times the product of the contact rate, I(t)/N , and the disease transmission rate β. The third
     equation reflects that the infectious individuals leave the infectious population per unit time,
     dI(u)/du, as a rate of γI(u). The second equation follows immediately from the first and third
     ones as a result of dS(u)/du + dI(u)/du + dR(u)/du = 0. Assuming that only a small fraction
     of the population is infected or removed in the onset phase of an epidemic, we have S(u)/N ≈ 1
     and thus the second equation reduces to dI(u)/du = (β − γ)I(u), revealing that the infectious
     population is growing if and only if β > γ. As the expected lifetime of an infected case is given
     by γ −1 , the ratio R0 = β/γ is the average number of new infectious cases directly produced by
     an infected case in a completely susceptible population. The so called basic reproductive number

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                                9
     is a good indicator of the transmissibility of an infectious disease.
           In this paper, we only consider the standard SIR model, although it is still feasible to design
     g(·)’s from its variations (see a comprehensive summary in Bailey et al. (1975)), such as the
     susceptible-infectious (SIS) model, the susceptible-infectious-recovered-deceases (SIRD) model,
     the susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (SEIR) model, the susceptible-exposed-infectious-
     susceptible (SEIS) model, and their versions with the maternally-derived immunity compart-
     ment (Hethcote, 2000), as well as the recently developed extended-SIR (eSIR) model (Song
     et al., 2020). For modeling discrete time-series data, we use the discrete-time version of the
     standard SIR model,                           
                                                      Ṡt = −βSt−1 It−1
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                            N
                                                   
                                                                          I
                                                     I˙t = βSt−1 t−1       N − γIt−1
                                                                                                .                                 (4)
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                    Ṙt = γIt−1
                                                   
     The model has three trajectories, one for each compartment. The compositional nature of the
     three trajectories implies that we only need two of the three sequence data, e.g. St = N − Ct
     and Rt for t = 1, . . . , n. However, recovery data only exist in few regions, and suffer from under-
     reporting issue even if existing, which makes both model inference and predictions infeasible.
     Alternatively, we consider both of the removed and actively infectious cases as missing data and
     mimic their relationship in spirit to some compartmental models in epidemiology. Specifically,
     we assume the number of new removed cases at time t, i.e. Ṙt , is sampled from a Poisson
     distribution with mean γIt−1 , that is, Ṙt ∼ Poi(γIt−1 ) = Poi(γ(N − Ct−1 − Rt−1 )), where γ
     should be specified. Such a strategy but with different error structure was also considered in some
     other compartmental models in epidemiology (see e.g. Siettos and Russo, 2013; Anastassopoulou
     et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). We can estimate the value of γ from publicly available high-
     quality data where confirmed, deaths, and recovery cases are all well-documented, or from prior
     epidemic studies due to the same under-reporting issue in actual data. In this paper, we choose
     the removal rate γ = 0.1 as suggested by Pedersen and Meneghini (2020) and Weitz et al. (2020).
     Based on this simplification, we rewrite the first equation in (4) as,
                                                                                           N − Ct−1 − Rt−1
                             (N − Ct ) − (N − Ct−1 )             =      −β(N − Ct−1 )                         ,
                                                                                                      N
     resulting in
                                                                            N − Ct−1 − Rt−1
                                               Ċt   =     β(N − Ct−1 )                             .
                                                                                      N

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     10                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     Thus, we formulate the NB mean function g(·) for the standard SIR model as,
                                                                                       N − Ct−1 − Rt−1
                                 g(Ct−1 , Θ = {β}|R)             =     β(N − Ct−1 )                        ,                      (5)
                                                                                                   N
     where R can be sequentially inferred from C.
           Without any existing information, in our Bayesian framework we assume β from a gamma
     distribution with hyperparameters that makes both the mean and variance of the transformed
     variable R0 = β/γ equal to 1, that is, β ∼ Ga(1, 1/γ).
     3      Model Fitting
     In this section, we briefly describe the MCMC algorithm for posterior inference and forecasting.
     Our Bayesian inferential strategy allows us to simultaneously infer all model-specific parameters
     and quantify their uncertainties.
     3.1      MCMC algorithms
     We first describe how to update the dispersion parameter φ in the proposed Bayesian framework,
     as it does not depend on the choice of models. At each MCMC iteration, we perform the following
     step:
           Update of dispersion parameter φ: We update φ by using a random walk Metropolis-
     Hastings (RWMH) algorithm. We first propose a new φ∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated
                              
     from N log φ, τφ2 and then accept the proposed value φ∗ with probability min(1, mMH ), where
     the Hastings ratio is
                                                              f (C|φ∗ , Θ) π (φ∗ ) J (φ ← φ∗ )
                                             mMH       =                                             .
                                                               f (C|φ, Θ) π (φ) J (φ∗ ← φ)
     Here we use J(· ← ·) to denote the proposal probability distribution for the selected move. Note
     that the last term, which is the proposal density ratio, cancels out for this RWMH update.
     3.1.1       Top-level as a growth model
     We only present the updates of each parameters in the GRC model, as all other derivative models
     are its special cases. Our primary interest lies in the estimation of the final pandemic size K and
     the infectious rate at early epidemic stage λ.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              11
           Update of final epidemic size parameter K: We update K by using a RWMH algo-
     rithm. We first propose a new K ∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated from a truncated
     Poisson distribution Poi (log K) within [log CT , log N ] and then accept the proposed value K ∗
     with probability min(1, mMH ), where the Hastings ratio is
                                                       f (C|φ, K ∗ , λ, p, α) π (K ∗ ) J (K ← K ∗ )
                                     mMH         =                                                          .
                                                        f (C|φ, K, λ, p, α) π (K) J (K ∗ ← K)
     Note that with a discrete uniform prior on K, the last two terms cancel out for this RWMH
     update.
           Update of infectious rate parameter λ: We update λ by using a RWMH algorithm.
     We first propose a new λ∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated from N log λ, τλ2 and then
                                                                                                                      
     accept the proposed value λ∗ with probability min(1, mMH ), where the Hastings ratio is
                                                         f (C|φ, K, λ∗ , p, α) π (λ∗ ) J (λ ← λ∗ )
                                       mMH        =                                                      .
                                                          f (C|φ, K, λ, p, α) π (λ) J (λ∗ ← λ)
     Note that the last term, which is the proposal density ratio, cancels out for this RWMH update.
           Update of growth scaling parameter p: We update p by using a RWMH algorithm.
     We first propose a new p∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated from a truncated normal
     distribution N log p, τp2 within [−∞, 0] and then accept the proposed value p∗ with probability
                                        
     min(1, mMH ), where the Hastings ratio is
                                                         f (C|φ, K, λ, p∗ , α) π (p∗ ) J (p ← p∗ )
                                       mMH         =                                                     .
                                                          f (C|φ, K, λ, p, α) π (p) J (p∗ ← p)
     Note that with a uniform prior on p over its range [0, 1], the last two terms cancel out for this
     RWMH update.
           Update of symmetry parameter α: We update α by using a RWMH algorithm. We first
     propose a new α∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated from N log α, τα2 and then accept the
                                                                                                              
     proposed value α∗ with probability min(1, mMH ), where the Hastings ratio is
                                                        f (C|φ, K, λ, p, α∗ ) π (α∗ ) J (α ← α∗ )
                                       mMH        =                                                       .
                                                          f (C|φ, K, λ, p, α) π (α) J (α∗ ← α)
     Note that the last term, which is the proposal density ratio, cancels out for this RWMH update.
     3.1.2       Top-level as a compartmental model
     Our primary interest lies in the estimation of the reproductive number R0 = β/γ, which reflects
     the transmissibility of the disease. With our assumption that γ is given, we propose the following
     updates in each MCMC iterations.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     12                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
           Generate R based on C: We assume I1 = C1 , i.e. all the confirmed cases are capable to
     pass the disease to all susceptible individuals in a closed population at the very beginning. In
     other words, R1 = 0. Then we sample R2 ∼ Poi(γI1 ), where γ is a pre-specified tuning parameter.
     Due to the compositional nature, we can compute I2 = I1 +Ċ2 −R2 , where Ċ2 = C2 −C1 is the new
     confirmed cases and R1 is the total removed cases from the actively infectious population at time
     2. Next, we repeat this process of sampling Rt ∼ Poi(γIt−1 ) and computing It = It−1 + Ċt − Rt ,
     to generate the sequence R.
           Update of reproduction number parameter β: We update β by using a RWMH algo-
     rithm. We first propose a new β ∗ , of which logarithmic value is generated from a truncated normal
                                        
     distribution N log β, τβ2 and then accept the proposed value β ∗ with probability min(1, mMH ),
     where the Hastings ratio is
                                                              f (C|β ∗ , R) π (β ∗ ) J (β ← β ∗ )
                                            mMH        =                                             .
                                                              f (C|β, R) π (β) J (β ∗ ← β)
     Note that the last term, which is the proposal density ratio, cancels out for this RWMH update.
     3.2      Posterior inference
     We obtain posterior inference by post-processing the MCMC samples after burn-in. Suppose
     that a sequence of MCMC samples on θ, θ ∈ {φ, K, λ, p, α, β},
                                                                 θ(1) , . . . , θ(U )
     have been collected, where u, u = 1, . . . , U indexes the iteration after burn-in. An approximate
     Bayesian estimator of each parameter can be simply obtained by averaging over the samples,
            PU          (u) /U . In additional to that, a quantile estimation or credible interval for each
     θ̂ =       u=1 θ
     parameter of interest can be obtained from this sequence as well.
     3.3      Forecasting
     Based on the sequences of MCMC samples on K, λ, p, and α in the growth model or β in the
     compartmental model, we can predict the cumulative or new confirmed cases at any future time
     Tf by Monte Carlo simulation. Particularly, from time T + 1 to Tf , we sequentially generate
                                     (u)
                                   Ċt        ∼    NB(g(Ct−1 , Θ(u) ), φ(u) ),        t = T + 1, . . . , Tf .                     (6)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              13
     Then, both short and long-term forecast can be made by summarizing the (Tf − T )-by-U matrix
     of MCMC samples. For instance, the predictive number of cumulative and new confirmed cases
                                                             (u)                      (u)
     at time T + 1, in average, are U
                                                  P                        PU
                                                     u=1 CT +1 /U and         u=1 ĊT +1 /U , respectively.
     4      Results
     In this section, we discuss the findings of COVID-19 data analysis. We first implemented each
     of the growth models listed in Table 1 (excluding GGC) and the standard SIR model under the
     proposed Bayesian framework for the top 20 countries with the most confirmed cases as of August
     22, 2020. Note that the input data was the sequence of confirmed cases C only, which is accessi-
     ble from the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering COVID-19
     Data Repository (https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/). Several recent COVID-
     19 studies also based their analyses on this resource (Dong et al., 2020; Zhou and Ji, 2020; Toda,
     2020). For our MCMC algorithms, we set 100, 000 iterations with the first half as burn in and
     chose weakly informative priors described in Section 2. Both numerical and graphical summaries
     for posterior inference and short-term forecasting are presented. Our final goal is to compare the
     predictive performance of all models, taking ARIMA as a benchmark model.
     4.1      Forecasting of daily confirmed cases in U.S.
     We first present the forecasting of U.S. daily confirmed cases made by the ARIMA and our
     Bayesian framework with the choices of a GRC or SIR model. As we can see from Figures 1,
     the GRC model demonstrates a downwards trend, the SIR model displays an upward trend,
     while the ARIMA model predicts a flat trajectory of daily predicted cases. A natural feature
     of epidemiological interest is the estimated final size and date of the epidemic. Growth models
     comprise of a model parameter K that estimates the final epidemic size. On the other hand,
     for the SIR model, there is no available parameter that estimates the final size. Hence, the final
     case count is approximated to be the predictive mean that converges to a certain value from
     the related MCMC samples. A similar strategy following Perone (2020) is applied to obtain the
     predicted mean of the final case counts using the ARIMA model. The estimated cumulative
     confirmed cases by the end of 2020 are projected to be 13.1, 106.1, and 10.0 (in millions), fitting
     the GRC, SIR, and ARIMA models, respectively. Under the assumption that the epidemic lasts
     until the end of 2021, the final epidemic sizes are predicted to be 13.4, 187.3, and 22.0 (in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
       14                                                           Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
       millions) by the three models, respectively. To account for the reasons behind the discrepancy
       in forecasts and to measure the validity of the results, there is a need for an appropriate strategy
       to evaluate and compare the predictive performance of the concerned models.
               (a)                           GRC                                            (b)                             SIR                                           (c)                           ARIMA
                                                                                                                                                                                               80,000
                                    75,000
        New daily confirmed cases                                                   New daily confirmed cases                                                      New daily confirmed cases
                                                                                                                1,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                                               60,000
                                    50,000
                                                                                                                                                                                               40,000
                                                                                                                 500,000
                                    25,000                                                                                                                                                     20,000
                                        0                                                                              0                                                                           0
                                         M        Ap   M       n   Au g   Se   O                                        M        Ap   M       n   Au g   Se   O                                     M        Ap   M       n   Au g   Se   O
                                             ar    r   ay   Ju     Ju l    p   ct                                           ar    r   ay   Ju     Ju l    p   ct                                        ar    r   ay   Ju     Ju l    p   ct
                                                               Date                                                                           Date                                                                        Date
       Figure 1: The one-month forecasting of new daily confirmed cases in the U.S. made by the (a)
       GRC and (b) SIR model under the proposed Bayesian framework, as well as the benchmark
       (c) ARIMA model. The black circles represent the observed case numbers since the beginning
       of March, 2020, while the colored circles and ribbons represent the predicted means and 95%
       prediction intervals, respectively.
       4.2                               Model comparison through rolling-origin cross-validation
       Cross-validation (CV) is a resampling procedure used to evaluate regression and classification
       models on a limited data sample. The procedure randomly splits all data samples into two
       parts: training and testing sets, where the former is used to fit a model and the latter is used
       to evaluate the model’s prediction performance in terms of a certain error measure. The key
       assumption of CV is that all data points should be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
       Unfortunately, time-series data is serially autocorrelated i.e. the observations are dependent on
       the time they were recorded on. To circumvent this situation, Tashman (2000) discussed a
       rolling-origin CV (ROCV) technique that splits the data into training and testing sets without
       hampering the i.i.d. assumption. An adaptation of this method is used here to evaluate the short-
       term forecasting performance among different top-level choices under the proposed Bayesian

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              15
     framework and ARIMA. Figure 2 shows the ROCV representation for an example of time-series
     data (T = 17). In our analysis, the choice of initial training sample size was set to seven days so
     as to evaluate how well the models are able to generate forecasts during the initial phase of the
     pandemic, while the testing sample size was chosen to be three days to meet with our objective
     of comparing short-term forecasting performance. We define the first day t = 1 as the date when
     the 100-th case was confirmed, so it varied for different countries.
                                                                                                               time
     Figure 2: A visual guide to rolling-origin cross-validation (ROCV), where the total sample size
     T = 17, the initial training sample size is 9, and the testing sample size is 3. The green, orange,
     and white circles are training, testing, and unused samples in one CV iteration.
           A CV algorithm needs a predictive error metric that could quantify model performance
     in terms of forecasting accuracy. Root mean square error (RMSE) and mean absolute devi-
     ations (MAD) are candidates of error measures for out-of-bag predictions but are dependent
     on scale. As a result, large values may influence the errors to be larger. Mean absolute per-
     centage error (MAPE) has been a widely used predictive measure due to its interpretability
     and its independence from scale. Although, the distribution of such percentage errors can
     be skewed if the data consists of values close to zero.                            Moreover, there is a possibility of
     this measure being undefined by having a zero in the denominator. To address these issues,
     Tashman (2000) proposed an improved percentage error metric namely, symmetric mean ab-
     solute percentage error (sMAPE). This metric was considered in our analysis as it circum-
     vented the problem of having an undefined measure and provided better symmetry as com-
     pared to MAPE. In all, we summarize the evaluation procedure used in this paper as follows.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     16                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
         Algorithm 1: Rolling-origin cross-validation (ROCV)
         1 Store the data starting day 1 to day T ;
         2 Initialize the number of initial training observations k (k = 7);
         3 Set the size of the testing set ω (ω = 3);
         4 while k + ω ≤ T do
         5       Learn the first k observations (green circles) as training data;
         6       Hold out the next k + 1, . . . , k + ω observations (orange circles) as the testing data;
         7       Discard the remaining T − (k + ω) observations (white circles);
         8       Compute an out-of-bag prediction error measure on the testing set (orange circles);
         9
                                                                               k+ω
                                                                           2 X             et
                                                       sMAPE          =
                                                                           ω           ŷt + yt
                                                                              t=k+1
                 k = k + 1;
       10  end
           Figure 3 displays the smoothed sMAPE curves generated by the ROCV across time for the
     top 20 countries with respect to the highest cumulative confirmed cases as of August 22, 2020. As
     we can see, all the models performed poorly in the early stage but as more and more data became
     available to be learned, the predictive performance gradually improved as the sMAPE dropped.
     It can also be observed that the ARIMA and SIR models were performing a lot worse in general
     than the growth models in the early phase. This could be attributed to the fact that ARIMA
     not having the growth specific parameters, unable to detect the early growth. On the other
     hand, making assumptions of a fixed transmission rate γ and due to the under-reported data
     issue, SIR performed poorly. While, the stochastic growth curves were able to learn the trend
     of epidemiological data in the initial phase with the help of the growth and scaling parameters.
     Although, towards the latter half of the epidemic, all the models were performing equally well.
     Hence, it is hard to conclude that any one particular dominated the entire duration of the
     epidemic.
           Now, the question arises of whether we could pick one model which has the best predictive
     performance on an average for any particular country. To answer that we construct a Cleveland
     dot plot, as shown in Figure 4, that allows us to rank the model performance averaged over

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                   A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                                   17
                           Argentina                Bangladesh            Brazil                   Chile               Colombia
                                         15                       15                                             9
                10                                                                   10
                                         10                       10                                             6
                 5                                                                   5
                                         5                         5                                             3
                 0                       0                         0                 0                           0
                      Au g                    M        n      g        Ju n      g         Au g                      Ju n       g
                     Ap
                      Ju
                      Ju
                      M
                         l
                         n
                        ay
                         r                     ay   Ju
                                                           Au
                                                           Ju l        M
                                                                       Ap
                                                                         ay
                                                                          r   Au
                                                                              Ju l        Ap
                                                                                           Ju
                                                                                           Ju
                                                                                           M
                                                                                              l
                                                                                              n
                                                                                             ay
                                                                                              r                      M
                                                                                                                     Ap
                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                        r    Au
                                                                                                                             Ju l
                            France                   Germany              India                     Iran                  Italy
                                                                  15                 20                         15                    Model
                15                       20                                          15                         10
                10                                                10                                                                     GLC
                                         10                                          10
                 5                                                 5                  5                          5
                                                                                                                                         Richards
                 0                       0                         0                  0                          0
                                                                                                                                         GRC
        sMAPE
                MAu
                 Ju g
                    l                    MAu
                                          Ju g
                                             l                         Jun    Au g    M   Au
                                                                                          Ju g
                                                                                             l                   M   Au
                                                                                                                     Ju g
                                                                                                                        l
                 Jun                      Jun                           ay                Jun                        Jun
                                                                                                                                         Bertalanffy
                 May
                 Ap r
                   ar                     May
                                          Ap r
                                            ar                         M
                                                                       Ap r   Ju l        May
                                                                                          Ap r
                                                                                            ar                       May
                                                                                                                     Ap r
                                                                                                                       ar
                            Mexico                   Pakistan             Peru                    Russia              Saudi Arabia       Gompertz
                12                       25                                          20
                                         20                       20                                            15                       ARIMA
                 9                                                                   15
                                         15                       15
                 6                                                10                 10                         10                       Logistic
                                         10
                 3                        5                        5                  5                          5
                                                                                                                                         SIR
                 0                        0                        0                  0                          0
                     Ju n          g           Au g                    Ju n      g        Ju n           g           Ju n       g
                     M
                     Ap
                       ay
                        r       Au
                                Ju l          Ap
                                               Ju
                                               Ju
                                               M
                                                  l
                                                  n
                                                 ay
                                                  r                    M
                                                                       Ap
                                                                         ay
                                                                          r   Au
                                                                              Ju l        M
                                                                                          Ap
                                                                                            ay
                                                                                             r        Au
                                                                                                      Ju l           M
                                                                                                                     Ap
                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                        r    Au
                                                                                                                             Ju l
                          South Africa                Spain              Turkey                United Kingdom         United States
                                                                                     20
                15                       15                       20                 15                         20
                10                       10                       15
                                                                                     10
                                                                  10                                            10
                 5                       5                         5                 5
                 0                       0                         0                 0                           0
                     Ju n       Au g     MAu
                                          Ju g
                                             l                         Ju n   Au g        Au
                                                                                          Ju g
                                                                                             l                       Au
                                                                                                                     Ju g
                                                                                                                        l
                     M ay          l      Ju
                                          M  n
                                            ay                         M ay      l        Ju n
                                                                                            ay                       Ju n
                                                                                                                       ay
                     Ap r       Ju        Ap r
                                            ar                         Ap r   Ju          M
                                                                                          Ap r                       M
                                                                                                                     Ap r
                                                                          Date
       Figure 3: The smoothed sMAPE curves generated by the rolling-origin cross-validation (ROCV)
       over time for the top 20 countries with the most confirmed cases as of August 22, 2020.
       the entire duration, per country. Furthermore, the countries are arranged in descending order
       of predictive performance from the bottom to the top. It is observed that all the models had
       the best and the worst predictive performances for Italy and South Africa respectively. The
       Richards model had the minimum averaged sMAPE for forecasting cumulative case counts in
       the U.S. While, the GRC model had the lowest averaged sMAPE across seven countries followed
       by the GLC model with four. The SIR model was the best performer for South Africa. The
       Richards, Bertalanffy, and Gompertz models also had their fair share of predictive dominance in
       the remaining countries. On the other hand, the ARIMA model was a below-average performer
       across all countries.
                     In general, the GRC and GLC models were consistent performers throughout all countries
       due to their ability to detect sub-exponential growth rates at an early stage of an epidemic. In
       most cases, the GRC and Richards models were the best performers in countries that did not
       have symmetric ‘S’-shaped growth patterns and displayed randomness as well as multiple peaks.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     18                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
           South Africa
                  Peru
             Argentina
              Pakistan
                                                                                                                   Type
         United States
                                                                                                                         Growth
                 Brazil
                                                                                                                         ARIMA
             Germany
                                                                                                                         SIR
                  Chile
             Colombia                                                                                              Model
          Saudi Arabia                                                                                                   GLC
                  India                                                                                                  Richards
                   Iran                                                                                                  GRC
                                                                                                                         Bertalanffy
                Turkey
                                                                                                                         Gompertz
                France
                                                                                                                         ARIMA
       United Kingdom
                                                                                                                         Logistic
                 Spain
                                                                                                                         SIR
           Bangladesh
                Mexico
                Russia
                   Italy
                                0.0                  0.5                 1.0                1.5              2.0
                                                             loge(Mean sMAPE)
     Figure 4: The Cleveland dot plot of the averaged sMAPE generated by the rolling-origin cross-
     validation (ROCV) for the top 20 countries with the most confirmed cases as of August 22,
     2020.
     This is due to the inclusion of the scale parameter α that could account for any asymmetry in
     the data. Countries including the U.S., Peru, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Turkey, and France display
     multiple peaks in the daily confirmed case counts. As a result, the Richards model performs the
     best in the U.S., United Kingdom (U.K.)., and Peru, while the GRC model dominates in the rest
     of the countries having multiple peaks. Moreover, a random structure was observed in countries
     like Brazil, Chile, Bangladesh, and Mexico. GRC being the most complex model out of all the
     other growth models performed the best in these countries. On the other hand, the GLC model
     usually performed better in countries that had a single peak and attributed an approximate
     ‘S’-shaped curvature. The GLC model was able to generalize better than the GRC model when
     the data was well structured and had less randomness. Countries including Argentina, Pakistan,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              19
     Germany, Colombia, and India attributed a single peak without much randomness. As a result,
     the GLC model was a better performer in these countries. Whereas, in the case of South Africa,
     the usual growth models performed the worst due to a staggering growth rate in the initial and
     the middle phase of the epidemic. The SIR model performed the best out of the worst while the
     logistic model performed well due to its simplicity. On the other hand, the Gompertz model was
     the best performer in Russia, Spain, and Italy as it generalizes better than the other models.
     5      Conclusion
     In this paper, we developed a number of stochastic variants of growth and compartmental models
     under a unified Bayesian framework. A theoretical comparison of growth models has been dis-
     cussed in greater detail in the literature (see e.g. Chowell et al., 2014, 2016; Chowell, 2017; Pell
     et al., 2018; Chowell et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2020; Roosa et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). However,
     to our best knowledge, no work systematically compares their performances between all pairs as
     well as against a compartmental model such as the SIR model and a time-series forecasting model
     such as the ARIMA. Based on our analysis, we conclude that the proposed Bayesian framework
     not only allows room for interpretation but also offers an exemplary predictive performance when
     it comes to COVID-19 daily report data. Moreover, ARIMA being a pure learning algorithm
     is not able to match with the forecasting accuracy of stochastic models, let alone the model
     parameters of ARIMA do not provide any information on epidemiological interests.
           For future work, we aim to develop an ensemble model, which can aggregate the prediction
     of each base model and results in once final prediction for the unseen data. Note that Chowell
     et al. (2020) have recently introduced a GGM-GLM ensemble model and compared forecasting
     performances of that with the individual models for the Ebola Forecasting Challenge (Viboud
     et al., 2018). It was reported that the ensemble model outperformed the others under some
     circumstances. We also plan to perform long-term forecasting evaluation using some epidemic
     features described in Tabataba et al. (2017). Chowell et al. (2019) have recently developed a
     sub-epidemic wave model that could detect multiple peaks in the data, which has the potential
     to improve forecasting performance. Thus, developing stochastic growth models via the addition
     of a change-point detection mechanism to account for multiple peaks is worth investigating. In
     this regard, we have demonstrated that an approach that combines a change-point detection
     model and a stochastic SIR model could significantly improve the short-term forecasting of the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     20                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     new daily confirmed cases (Jiang et al., 2020).
     6      Software
     Figure 5: The web interface of the COVID-19 trend analysis page. The green box highlights
     the input panel that allows users to choose different mapping types and levels for a region. The
     orange box highlights the visualizations for short-term forecasting as per the instructions of users.
     Other tabs offer different graphs for summarizing the model performance, long-term forecasting,
     and county-level spatial maps.
           This paper introduces a user-friendly interactive web application (https://qiwei.shinyapps.
     io/PredictCOVID19/) integrated with R Shiny package. Shiny is a web platform that allows
     users to interact with real-time data and use a myriad of visualization tools to analyze it. The
     web application has been developed to help the general public assess both short and long-term
     forecasts of COVID-19 across the U.S. at both state and metropolitan-level. The numbers of
     cumulative or new daily confirmed cases as well as deaths are projected by different growth
     models and the SIR model under the proposed Bayesian framework. Alongside the numerical
     summaries, users can view and interpret the trends that cover the same information. To validate

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              21
     the short-term forecasting, numerical and graphical summaries of MAE and MAPE of the pre-
     dictions are provided for the more advanced users. Moving on to the long-term forecasting, the
     models estimate the peak number of cases and deaths as well as their respective dates. Moreover,
     a predictive estimate for the final size and date is also offered. Finally, for the users that are keen
     to visualize the currently observed cases at a geographical level, the website offers county-level
     spatial maps.
           We also provide the related R/C++ codes on GitHub (https://github.com/liqiwei2000/
     BayesEpiModels).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     22                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
     References
     Anastassopoulou C, Russo L, Tsakris A, Siettos C (2020). Data-based analysis, modelling and
         forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak. PloS One, 15(3): e0230405.
     Bailey NT, et al. (1975). The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its applications.
         Charles Griffin & Company Ltd, 5a Crendon Street, High Wycombe, Bucks HP13 6LE.
     Batista M (2020). Estimation of the final size of the COVID-19 epidemic. MedRxiv. doi, 10:
         16–20023606.
     Bullock J, Pham KH, Lam CSN, Luengo-Oroz M, et al. (2020). Mapping the landscape of
         artificial intelligence applications against COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11336.
     Chowell G (2017). Fitting dynamic models to epidemic outbreaks with quantified uncertainty: A
         primer for parameter uncertainty, identifiability, and forecasts. Infectious Disease Modelling,
         2(3): 379–398.
     Chowell G, Hincapie-Palacio D, Ospina J, Pell B, Tariq A, Dahal S, et al. (2016). Using phe-
         nomenological models to characterize transmissibility and forecast patterns and final burden
         of Zika epidemics. PLoS currents, 8.
     Chowell G, Luo R, Sun K, Roosa K, Tariq A, Viboud C (2020). Real-time forecasting of epidemic
         trajectories using computational dynamic ensembles. Epidemics, 30: 100379.
     Chowell G, Simonsen L, Viboud C, Kuang Y (2014). Is West Africa approaching a catastrophic
         phase or is the 2014 Ebola epidemic slowing down? different models yield different answers
         for Liberia. PLoS currents, 6.
     Chowell G, Tariq A, Hyman JM (2019). A novel sub-epidemic modeling framework for short-term
         forecasting epidemic waves. BMC medicine, 17(1): 164.
     COVID I, Murray CJ, et al. (2020). Forecasting COVID-19 impact on hospital bed-days, ICU-
         days, ventilator-days and deaths by US state in the next 4 months. MedRxiv.
     Desta F, Mac Siurtain M, Colbert J (1999). Parameter estimation of nonlinear growth models
         in forestry. Silv Fenn, 33(4): 327–336.
     Distante C, Pereira IG, Goncalves LMG, Piscitelli P, Miani A (2020). Forecasting COVID-
         19 outbreak progression in Italian regions: A model based on neural network training from
         Chinese data. medRxiv.
     Dong E, Du H, Gardner L (2020). An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in
         real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5): 533–534.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              23
     Elmousalami HH, Hassanien AE (2020). Day level forecasting for coronavirus disease (COVID-
         19) spread: analysis, modeling and recommendations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07778.
     Fanelli D, Piazza F (2020). Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading in China, Italy and
         France. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 134: 109761.
     Gelman A, et al. (2006). Prior distributions for variance parameters in hierarchical models
         (comment on article by Browne and Draper). Bayesian Analysis, 1(3): 515–534.
     Gomez J, Prieto J, Leon E, Rodriguez A (2020). INFEKTA: A general agent-based model for
         transmission of infectious diseases: Studying the COVID-19 propagation in Bogotá-Colombia.
         medRxiv.
     Haberman R (1998). Mathematical models: Mechanical vibrations, population dynamics, and
         traffic flow. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
     Hethcote HW (2000). The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review, 42(4): 599–653.
     Hsieh YH (2009). Richards model: A simple procedure for real-time prediction of outbreak
         severity. In: Modeling and Dynamics of Infectious Diseases, 216–236. World Scientific.
     Hsieh YH (2010). Pandemic influenza A (H1N1) during winter influenza season in the southern
         hemisphere. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, 4(4): 187–197.
     Hsieh YH, Chen C (2009). Turning points, reproduction number, and impact of climatological
         events for multi-wave dengue outbreaks. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 14(6):
         628–638.
     Hsieh YH, Lee JY, Chang HL (2004). Sars epidemiology modeling. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
         10(6): 1165.
     Hsieh YH, Ma S (2009). Intervention measures, turning point, and reproduction number for
         dengue, singapore, 2005. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 80(1):
         66–71.
     Hu Z, Ge Q, Jin L, Xiong M (2020). Artificial intelligence forecasting of COVID-19 in China.
         arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07112.
     Jia L, Li K, Jiang Y, Guo X, et al. (2020). Prediction and analysis of Coronavirus Disease 2019.
         arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05447.
     Jiang S, Zhou Q, Zhan X, Li Q (2020). Bayessmiles: Bayesian segmentation modeling for
         longitudinal epidemiological studies. medRxiv.
     Kaps M, Herring W, Lamberson W (2000). Genetic and environmental parameters for traits

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     24                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
         derived from the brody growth curve and their relationships with weaning weight in angus
         cattle. Journal of Animal Science, 78(6): 1436–1442.
     Kermack WO, McKendrick AG (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
         Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A, 115(772): 700–721.
     Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk S, et al. (2020). Early dynam-
         ics of transmission and control of COVID-19: A mathematical modelling study. The lancet
         Infectious Diseases.
     Lee SY, Lei B, Mallick B (2020). Estimation of covid-19 spread curves integrating global data
         and borrowing information. PLOS ONE, 15(7): 1–17.
     Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, et al. (2020). Substantial undocumented
         infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science,
         368(6490): 489–493.
     Liu Z, Magal P, Seydi O, Webb G (2020). Predicting the cumulative number of cases for the
         COVID-19 epidemic in China from early data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12298.
     Pan A, Liu L, Wang C, Guo H, Hao X, Wang Q, et al. (2020). Association of public health
         interventions with the epidemiology of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China. Journal of
         American Medical Association, 323(19): 1915–1923.
     Pedersen MG, Meneghini M (2020). Quantifying undetected COVID-19 cases and effects of
         containment measures in italy. ResearchGate Preprint (online 21 March 2020) DOI, 10.
     Pei S, Shaman J (2020). Initial simulation of SARS-CoV2 spread and intervention effects in the
         Continental US. medRxiv.
     Pell B, Kuang Y, Viboud C, Chowell G (2018). Using phenomenological models for forecasting
         the 2015 Ebola challenge. Epidemics, 22: 62–70.
     Perone G (2020). An ARIMA model to forecast the spread and the final size of COVID-2019
         epidemic in Italy. medRxiv.
     Roosa K, Lee Y, Luo R, Kirpich A, Rothenberg R, Hyman J, et al. (2020). Real-time forecasts
         of the COVID-19 epidemic in China from February 5th to February 24th, 2020. Infectious
         Disease Modelling, 5: 256–263.
     Siettos CI, Russo L (2013). Mathematical modeling of infectious disease dynamics. Virulence,
         4(4): 295–306.
     Song PX, Wang L, Zhou Y, He J, Zhu B, Wang F, et al. (2020). An epidemiological forecast

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       A Bayesian Framework of Epidemiological Models                                              25
         model and software assessing interventions on COVID-19 epidemic in China. MedRxiv.
     Sun H, Qiu Y, Yan H, Huang Y, Zhu Y, Chen SX (2020). Tracking and predicting COVID-19
         epidemic in China Mainland. medRxiv.
     Tabataba FS, Chakraborty P, Ramakrishnan N, Venkatramanan S, Chen J, Lewis B, et al. (2017).
         A framework for evaluating epidemic forecasts. BMC Infectious Diseases, 17(1): 345.
     Tashman L (2000). Out-of sample tests of forecasting accuracy: A tutorial and review. Interna-
         tional Journal of Forecasting, 16.
     Toda AA (2020). Susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) Dynamics of COVID-19 and Economic
         Impact. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11221.
     Topal M, Bolukbasi Ş (2008). Comparison of nonlinear growth curve models in broiler chickens.
         Journal of Applied Animal Research, 34(2): 149–152.
     Vaishya R, Javaid M, Khan IH, Haleem A (2020). Artificial intelligence (AI) applications for
         COVID-19 pandemic. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews.
     Viboud C, Simonsen L, Chowell G (2016). A generalized-growth model to characterize the early
         ascending phase of infectious disease outbreaks. Epidemics, 15: 27–37.
     Viboud C, Sun K, Gaffey R, Ajelli M, Fumanelli L, Merler S, et al. (2018). The RAPIDD ebola
         forecasting challenge: Synthesis and lessons learnt. Epidemics, 22: 13–21.
     Wang L, Wang G, Gao L, Li X, Yu S, Kim M, et al. (2020). Spatiotemporal dynamics, nowcasting
         and forecasting of COVID-19 in the United States. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14103.
     Weitz JS, Beckett SJ, Coenen AR, Demory D, Dominguez-Mirazo M, Dushoff J, et al. (2020).
         Modeling shield immunity to reduce COVID-19 epidemic spread. Nature Medicine, 1–6.
     Werker A, Jaggard K (1997). Modelling asymmetrical growth curves that rise and then fall:
         Applications to foliage dynamics of sugar beet (beta vulgarisl.). Annals of Botany, 79(6):
         657–665.
     Wu K, Darcet D, Wang Q, Sornette D (2020). Generalized logistic growth modeling of the
         COVID-19 outbreak in 29 provinces in China and in the rest of the world. arXiv preprint
         arXiv:2003.05681.
     Yamana T, Pei S, Shaman J (2020). Projection of COVID-19 cases and deaths in the US as
         individual states re-open may 4, 2020. medRxiv.
     Yang Z, Zeng Z, Wang K, Wong SS, Liang W, Zanin M, et al. (2020). Modified SEIR and AI
         prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in China under public health interventions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.11.20210971.this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
     26                             Qiwei Li, Tejasv Bedi, Guanghua Xiao, and Yang Xie
         Journal of Thoracic Disease, 12(3): 165.
     Zhou T, Ji Y (2020). Semiparametric Bayesian Inference for the Transmission Dynamics of
         COVID-19 with a State-Space Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05581.
