medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          The Health Impact of Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems: A Systematic Review
                   1            2                    3           4             5           6,7
          Hajat C,    Stein E,    Shantikumar S,       Niaura R,   Ferrara P,    Polosa R
               1.   Public Health Institute, UAE University
               2.   Independent Researcher
               3.   Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
               4.   School of Global Public Health, New York University
               5.   Centre for Public Health Research, University of Milan - Bicocca, Monza, Italy
               6.   Center of Excellence for the Acceleration of HArm Reduction (CoEHAR), University of
                    Catania, Catania, Italy.
               7.   Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
          Corresponding Author:
          Dr Cother Hajat,
          Chajat@doctors.org.uk
          Running Title: Clusters and Costs for Multiple Chronic Conditions
          Word count:
          Abstract 506
          Manuscript 7477
          Tables: 4
          Figures: 2
          References: 90
          Keywords: Tobacco Harm Reduction, E-cigarettes, ENDS, Smoking, Tobacco, Cardiovascular Disease,
          Cancer, Mortality, Respiratory Disease, Mental Health
                                                                                                                                        1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Abstract
          Introduction
          The objective of this systematic review was to identify, report and critically appraise studies that
          have reported health outcomes from use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS).
          Methods
          We conducted a systematic review of all published literature on the health impact of ENDS products
                  st
          from 1     January 2015 until February 1, 2020, following the PRISMA protocol, including across the
          databases, PubMed, Embase, Scopus and Google Scholar using medical subject headings.
          A category for the level of evidence was assigned blindly using the Centres for Evidence Based
          Medicine framework. A similar approach was adopted to evaluate methodological quality of each
          study utilizing the National Institutes for Health (NIH) Quality Assessment Tools.
          Results
          The database search identified 755 studies and a further 265 were identified from other sources and
          reference reviews of which 37 studies met the eligibility criteria.
          The majority of studies were of low strength for levels of evidence including 24 (65%) cross-
          sectional, 1(2.7%) case-control and six (16%) case studies. There were four (11%) cohort studies and
          only one (2.7%) RCT. There was only one (2.7%) meta-analysis or pooled study of observational
          study designs; there were no pooled results of randomized controlled trials. Of 37 studies, eight
          (22%) studies reported on benefits, two (2%) studies were neutral, reporting on both harm and
          benefits, the remaining 27 (73%) reported only on harms. The quality ratings were poor (20, 54%),
          fair (9, 24%) and good (8, 22%).
          In our review ENDS use has not been shown to be causative for any CVD outcomes and has been
          shown to be beneficial for hypertensive patients. Switching from cigarettes to e-cigarettes resulted
          in reduced exacerbations of COPD, with no evidence of long-term deterioration in lung function.
          There was a suggestion of short-term reductions in respiratory function in asthmatics, but no
          increased risk of asthma in ENDS users who were never smokers. Mental Health, cancer and
          mortality have not been adequately studied to form any consensus with regards to health outcomes
          from ENDS use.
          Conclusion
          Our review suggests that the majority of studies on the use of ENDS products reported on negative
          health impacts with few reporting on health outcomes from switching from cigarettes to e-
          cigarettes. The strength of evidence and quality of the published studies overall is poor.
          Our review has demonstrated that ENDS use is not causative for any harmful CVD outcomes and
          may be beneficial for hypertensive patients. Switching from cigarettes to e-cigarettes resulted in
          reduced exacerbations of COPD, with no evidence of increased risk of asthma, long-term respiratory
          harm or deterioration in lung function. Other health outcomes such as mental health, cancer and
          mortality have not been adequately studied to form a consensus. However, the findings of our
          review did not negate the consensus held by many that ENDS use is safer than the risks posed from
          smoking cigarettes.
          Overall, our review found the research on ENDS use is not yet adequate to provide quantitative
          estimates about health risks. Consequently, the current body of evidence is inadequate for informing
          policy around tobacco harm reduction.
                                                                                                                                  2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Introduction
          Smoking is the leading preventable cause of illness and premature death and one of the top causes
                                                                                                              1
          of health inequalities, responsible for more than eight million deaths a year globally.
          The availability of tobacco harm reduction (THR) products has dramatically accelerated the
                                                           2
          reduction in smoking prevalence rate.              Electronic nicotine delivery devices (ENDS), such as electronic
                                                                                                                         3,4
          cigarettes and vapes, are thought to be one of the most effective smoking cessation methods                        due
                                                              5
          to a combination of successful quit rates             and their greater reach and accessibility compared with
                                                       2
          other smoking cessation methods.
          The prevalence of the use of ENDS is highest in the UK (6%) and the US (4-6%) compared with 1% the
                              2
          rest of Europe.       The vast majority of regular ENDS users are previous or current smokers: in the UK
                                                                                                         2
          over 99% of adult users and over 99.5% of adolescent users are former smokers;                   and in the US,
                                                                                                                               6
          98.7% of adults aged 45 years or older and 60% of adults aged 18-24 years were former smokers.
          To date, there has been no clear consensus on the safety profile of ENDS and safety concerns have
          resulted in varying regulations and bans on their sale and use globally. The most widely used
          comparator for health risk is that of the Public Health England Report that estimated e-cigarettes to
                                                                                         7
          pose less than a 5% risk compared with conventional cigarettes.                  There have been no meta-analyses
          or systematic reviews to quantify the health risk posed by ENDS to date resulting                in policy makers
          often using studies with flawed designs, or are animal, in vitro and in silico studies which may not
          translate to health outcomes in the real world.
          The objective of this systematic review was to identify, narratively synthesize, assess the strength
          and quality of evidence and critically appraise studies that have reported health outcomes
          associated with use of ENDS.
                                                                                                                                  3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Methods
          The aims of this study was to conduct a systematic review of the published literature on the health
                                                    st                        st
          impact of ENDS products from 1               January 2015 until 1      February 2020. For the purpose of our study,
          ENDS included all electronic nicotine delivery devices but did not include heat-not-burn products.
                                                                                                     8
          The study followed PRISMA guidelines for reporting of systematic reviews.
          Search strategy and eligibility criteria
                                                                   st                        th
          A literature search was conducted between 1                 October 2019 and 26       February 2020 using the
          databases PubMed, Embase, Scopus and Google Scholar. Medical subject headings were used in the
          execution of PubMed searches. The search strategy encompassed two domains, including one for
          ENDS and related products, and one for health outcomes, including terms for cardiovascular disease
          (CVD), cancer, respiratory, mortality and ‘other’ health outcomes. Search results were restricted to
          English language reports, human studies and studies published since 2015, because most ENDS use
          has fallen within this period and because ENDS products available prior to 2015 have evolved
          considerably. The references of relevant reviews were manually searched for additional eligible
          citations. The detailed search strategy is provided in Appendix 1.
          Search results were stored in Excel and de-duplicated before screening. The titles, abstracts and full
          texts of the search results were sequentially screened by two reviewers independently for inclusion
          using the eligibility criteria below, with disagreements resolved by blind review by a third reviewer.
          Figure 1 shows the inclusion and exclusion criteria used.
          [PLACEHOLDER FOR FIGURE 1]
          Figure 1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
          Reasons for excluding studies were documented and are shown in figure 2.
          [PLACEHOLDER FOR FIGURE 2]
          Figure 2. PRISMA flow chart of Included studies and Selection process
          Data extraction and quality assessment
          For all included studies, relevant data were extracted using a custom-designed table including
          author, year, country, aim, study design, sample size, participants, and relevant findings, including
          effect sizes and nature of impact on health outcomes. A category for the level of evidence was
                                                                                                      9
          assigned using the Oxford Centre for Evidence Based Medicine framework.                       A similar approach was
          adopted to evaluate methodological quality, with each study assigned a quality rating of “good”,
                                                                                                                      10
          “fair” or “poor” utilizing the National Institutes for Health (NIH) Quality Assessment Tools.                  All data
          extraction and quality assessments were performed by two reviewers independently, with
          consensus reached with involvement of a third reviewer in cases of disagreement. Findings of all
          studies were independently read and re-read, coded, and organised into categories, which were
          then compared across studies to identify relationships and themes.
                                                                                                                                  4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Results
          Thirty-seven studies were included in the review. Table 1 shows that the majority of studies were
          judged to be of low strength for levels of evidence, such as cross-sectional (24 studies, 65%), case-
          control (1 study, 2.7%) and case studies (6 studies, 16%). There were four (11%) cohort studies and
          one (2.7%) RCT. There was one (2.7%) MA/pooled study and no pooled results of randomized
          controlled trials (RCTs).
          Respiratory disorders made up 17 of the studies, followed by CVD (7), mental health (7) and one
          each on oral health, self-reported chronic health conditions, tonsillitis and nickel contact allergy.
          Table 2 summarises that 27 (73%) of the studies examined and reported only on harms, eight (22%)
          on benefits, two (2%) reported on both harm and benefits. The one meta-analysis (MA)/pooled data
          study reported on harms, the one RCT was on benefits, and of studies investigating harms only, the
          majority (20, 74%) were cross-sectional, with 1 (4%) MA/pooled analysis, 1 (4%) cohort and five
          (19%) case-studies. Although few in number, studies investigating benefits tended to be of higher
          levels of evidence with one RCT, three cohort (including two studies examining both harms and
          benefits), four cross-sectional, one case-control and one case study.
          The studies reporting on benefits from ENDS included two studies on hypertension development
          and control, one on oral cancer development, two on COPD exacerbation, one on respiratory
          infections and one on depressive symptoms. A further two studies reported on both harms and
          benefits of ENDS, both on depressive symptoms.
          Table 3 summarizes the quality ratings assigned to studies by health outcome. Raters one and two
          agreed on 32 out of 37 (94%) assessments of quality and level of evidence. “Poor” quality studies
          made up 20 (54%), “fair” made up nine (24%) and “good” made up eight (22%). Reasons for
          assigning poor quality ratings included insufficient follow-up for the outcome of interest to develop,
          inability to determine temporality and reverse causation, inadequate accounting for confounders
          and poor definitions of exposures and outcomes.
          The characteristics of included studies, including study design, key outcomes, level of evidence and
          quality rating, are detailed in Table 4.
          Overall results for health outcomes by category
          CVD Outcomes
          Two studies, an RCT and observational study both rated as being of “high” quality, reported on
          improvements to the control of BP in hypertensive patients, finding reductions in systolic blood
                                                                                         11,12
          pressure (SBP) by 9-10mmHg, and diastolic BP (DBP) by 6mmHg.
          Three studies reported on the association between CVD (including acute myocardial infarction [MI])
                                                                                                              13               14
          and the use of ENDS. Two large cross-sectional surveys on approximately 0.5 million                    and 60,000
          subjects found that users of ENDS had no increase in MI, coronary heart disease (CHD), premature
          CVD or CVD compared with never smokers. However, former smokers who used ENDS did have
                                                                                                                     13
          more CVD (OR 1.4) and premature CVD (OR 1.5) than never smokers in one of the studies.                        Dual
          users experienced higher CVD (OR 1.36) compared with those who were current smokers not using
          ENDS.13 A further study that did not account for former smokers or dual users, or for temporality
                                                                                                          15
          and reverse causation, found users of ENDS to have increased risk of MI (OR 1.8).
                                                                                                                                  5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                             All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          A large cross-sectional study investigating stroke found no excess risk in users of ENDS in never
                      16
          smokers.       The use of ENDS in ex-smokers was associated with a higher risk of stroke (OR 2.5)
                                                    16
          compared with never smokers.
          Respiratory Outcomes
          The majority of respiratory outcomes were on the development or exacerbation of chronic
          obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in adults or asthma in adolescents. A few further studies
          reported on other conditions such as rates of respiratory infection.
                                                                                                                    17
          The most rigorous studies reporting on COPD were a pooled study of two cohorts,                              and an
                                                             11                                                 18
          interventional study over 12 months,                  with further follow up over three years.           Those studies
          found that COPD exacerbations reduced in frequency in heavy smokers switching to e-cigarettes
                                          18
          from 2.3 to 1.4 annually,          and improvements in verified COPD Assessment Test (CAT) score, walking
                                                                                                            18
          distance and continued reductions in COPD exacerbations after three years.                           A study pooling
                                                        17
          findings from two cohort studies,                without excluding current smokers, reported e-cigarette users to
          have 8% higher prevalence of chronic bronchitis and COPD exacerbations in one of the included
          cohort studies. After five years of follow-up, no increased progression of lung disease or decline in
                                                                      17
          lung function was seen in e-cigarette users.                   Current and former smoking was adjusted for but not
          excluded.
                                                  ,19,20,21,22
          Five cross-sectional studies13                       investigated the association between e-cigarette use and
                                                   20
          COPD. In one of these studies,              85% of the sample did not fall into the age-risk category (age over
                                    23
          55 years) for COPD.          One of the cross-sectional studies on a sample of almost 900,000 never-
          smokers showed an association (OR 1.5) between e-cigarette use and self-reported COPD compared
                                           22
          with non-e-cigarette use.           Another study that segmented never and current smokers only found an
                                                                                                                                      21
          association between e-cigarettes and COPD in smokers (OR 1.3) and not in never-smokers (OR 0.9).
                                                                                         21,24,25,26,27,28
          Six studies investigated the development or control of asthma.                                   An experimental study
          showed that following e-cigarette use, respiratory system resistance and impedance were impacted
          up to 30 minutes post, but fractional exhaled nitric oxide did not differ between asthmatics and non-
                         28
          asthmatics.       Five of the six studies were cross-sectional in design and several relied on children and
          adolescents self-reporting on e-cigarette use and a diagnosis of asthma in schools and other
          educational facilities. The definitions of e-cigarette users included experimental and one-time use of
                                                24,25,26,28                                         21
          e-cigarettes in some studies.                      One of the cross-sectional studies         reported separately for
          never smokers and smokers, and found e-cigarette use to be associated with a higher rate of asthma
                                                                                                                           24
          in smokers (OR 1.3) but not in non-smokers (OR 0.9). Another large cross-sectional study                            reported
          an association of e-cigarette use in never smoking adolescents with a self-reported diagnosis of
          asthma (OR 2.7). The remaining studies reported associations between e-cigarette use and asthma,
                                                                21,26,28
          with OR’s ranging between 1.1 and 1.8.
          In a cross-sectional study on 914 smokers who switched to e-cigarettes, 66% reported reductions in
                                                                                                29
          the frequency of respiratory infections and 6% reported worsening.                       Single case studies reported on
          acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure and organizing pneumonia; organizing pneumonia; sensitivity
          pneumonitis and vesicular bronchial injury, but none specifically excluded other causes such as dual
          use, former smoking, other drug use or comorbidities.
          Cancer
          A small cross-sectional study demonstrated lower numbers of oral cancerous cells (50%) and cellular
                                                                                                                                  30
          changes (33%) in e-cigarette users who were never smokers compared with smokers (p=0.001).
                                                                                                                                       6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                             All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          The other was a case study of two individuals who developed oral cancer after 13 years of e-
          cigarette use. Other risk factors such as smoking were not mentioned as having been excluded.
          Mental Health
          Seven studies reported on the association between ENDS use and mental health disease. Of two
                              31,32
          cohort studies,           the first found that those with depressive symptoms were more likely to take up
          e-cigarette use at six months (beta coefficients 0.06 & 0.08), but at 12 month follow-up, they did not
                                                                                      31                      32
          have more depressive symptoms than non e-cigarette users.                      Another cohort study    found a
          greater increase in depressive symptoms in e-cigarette users after 12 months (beta=1.27, p0.01)
          compared with non e-cigarette users, with a positive dose-response effect.
                                               33,34,35,36
          Four cross-sectional studies                     reported a positive association between e-cigarette use and self-
          reported depressive symptoms with wide-ranging ORs from 1.03 to 4.2.
                                                  50
          Another cross-sectional study              found an association between e-cigarette use and attention-deficit
          hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; V=.073; p<.001), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)( V=.064;
          p=<002), gambling disorder (V=.081, p<.001), anxiety (V=.066; p<.001), low self-esteem (V=0.63;
          p=.002) and impulsivity traits (cohen’s d=.421; p<.001). The study did not control for cigarette use,
          had a participation rate of only 38% with potential sample bias and did not state a definition for e-
          cigarette use, in addition to not accounting for reverse causation.
          Oral Health
                                                                       37
          One study reported on dental health outcomes;                   a cross-sectional study that reported no
          association with self-reported dental health issues in e-cigarette users compared with never
          smokers.
          Other health outcomes
          One cross-sectional study reported an association between e-cigarette use and obesity (OR 4.4, p <
                                                              38
          .05) and alcohol abuse (OR 7.0, p < .05).              There were two single case studies of e-cigarette use being
                                                                    29                                             39
          linked to improvement of recurrent tonsillitis               and occurrence of nickel contact allergy.
          Mortality
          No studies were found that investigated mortality related to the use of ENDS.
                                                                                                                                  7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Discussion
          In order to determine the net health impact of ENDs, the benefits from quitting smoking must be
          weighed against any harms (or benefits) from the use of ENDS. The wider impacts from the use of
          ENDS on society, such as new uptake in never smokers and nicotine addiction, must also be factored
          in, which are outside of the scope of this review.
          This is the first article to systematically review the health outcomes from ENDS. Over the five-year
          period, 37 studies were identified. We found that studies tended to focus on the negative health
          impacts from ENDS, with the benefits of switching from cigarettes to ENDS being an uncommon
          outcome measure. Evidence of significant harms to health outcomes from ENDS was lacking from
          our review, with the majority of study designs being unable to rigorously establish causation. In the
          handful of studies that were of adequately rigorous design, no causation has been established
          between the use of ENDS and negative health outcomes. There is some evidence of positive health
          outcomes in those switching from cigarettes to e-cigarettes but further studies would be required to
          replicate the findings.
          Levels of evidence, quality and study design
          The sample size of studies was not a common study flaw found in this review. Due to the nature of
          the research question on self-reported smoking and use of ENDS, numerous studies used pre-
          existing survey data with 887,182 participants in the largest study. However, the large size of studies
          did not reflect their quality which was often poor.
          There were no studies rated above 2a for level of evidence, i.e. there were no MAs or pooled study
          designs on RCTs. Experimental rather than observational designs are desirable so that confounders
          and biases can be adequately accounted for but the vast majority of studies (97%) in our review
          were observational. There was only one interventional study investigating benefits from switching
          from smoking to e-cigarettes. The low number of RCTs in this review reflects the difficulty of
          conducting interventional THR studies in real world settings. There were few cohort studies, with
          only one study on harms, one on benefits and two exploring both harms and benefits.
          Cross sectional studies were predominant (41%), without accounting for temporality and reverse
          causation, which is particularly relevant here as the majority of ENDS users are current or former
                      1,5,40
          smokers.           Furthermore, those with smoking-related medical conditions such as asthma, COPD
                                                                                              41
          and CVD are more likely to switch to ENDS in order to quit smoking.                    Without accounting for
          temporality of the exposure and outcome, as well as former smoking status, many study findings are
          inadequate for causal inferences.
          We considered a MA of studies included in our review to be inappropriate, partly due to the
          common methodological flaws highlighted above and the vast heterogeneity between studies, for
          example in the definitions used for the exposure variable of ENDS use, and with regards to
          accounting for dual use, former use, duration and quantity of use. Our review also found re-use of
                                                                                        ,42,43
          the same surveys and databases for several separate studies.13
          Included studies were predominantly rated as being of poor quality. Studies that examined benefits
          to health outcomes had a relatively higher number of fair or good quality studies (6, 75%) compared
          with those on harms alone (9, 33%).
          Definition of Exposure
          The definitions used by studies for smoking and use of ENDS varied tremendously. The vast majority
          of studies included here relied on self-reported data for smoking and use of ENDS, which is known to
                                                                                                                                  8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                             All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
                                                                        44
          underestimate the true prevalence of smoking.                    Particularly problematic were several studies that
          asked children and adolescents in educational settings to self-report their use of cigarettes and ENDS
          which are usually prohibited. Furthermore, these studies used self-reported information from
                                                                                                                                    45
          adolescents on health outcomes such as asthma and depression which may also be unreliable.
                                                                                            46
          Health outcomes from smoking cigarettes are dose-dependent.                          Similarly, it is likely that health
          outcomes for ENDS are also dose-dependent, yet the majority of studies failed to quantify this in
          their definitions for exposure. Studies with poor definitions of smoking failed to account for
          quantity, duration since quitting and duration of ENDS use, dual and former use of cigarettes and
                  12,    ,16,17,33,36
          ENDS.      13               Studies using data from the Population Assessment of Tobacco Health (PATH)
                                                                                    ,16,20,22,47,48              34,31
          and Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System datasets13                                 and others,        respondents
          who ever used a cigarette, other tobacco product or ENDS, even once or twice, were regarded as
          former or current users. Those having ever experimented with cigarettes or e-cigarettes were
          therefore regarded in the same category as heavy smokers or daily e-cigarette users.
          Standard definitions exist for smoking, such as smoking 100 or more cigarettes, smoking at least one
          cigarette daily for 12 months or cigarette pack years (CPY) which accounts for both quantity and
                                                                                        49
          duration of smoking, both of which impact health outcomes.                       Similar approaches should be used to
          quantify use of ENDS. Some good definitions of smoking and ENDS use were seen that accounted for
                                                               11,32,22
          quantity, duration, dual and former use.
          Definitions of Outcomes
          Both exposures and outcomes were self-reported in the majority of studies, and only 14 (38%) of
          studies utilized verified health outcomes data. Self-reporting of outcomes is known to be unreliable
          and prone to bias in some situations. Particularly problematic in this review were several studies
          that asked children and adolescents in educational settings to self-report on asthma and depressive
                                                                                                                 24,25,26,28,50,51
          symptoms both of which could have led to subjective and inaccurate responses.
          Accounting for Smoking Status
          One of the major design flaws of the included studies was a failure to account for current, former
                                            52,53,54
          and dual use of cigarettes                 and in doing so, ignoring the known evidence that the majority of
                                                                                                                     52,53,54
          ENDS users do so for the purpose of quitting or cutting down on cigarette smoking.                                   Several
          studies compared health risks for ENDS users with those of never smokers without accounting for
          former smoking in the ENDS users, such that they were making a comparison of predominantly ex-
          smoking ENDS users with never smokers, rather than exclusively reporting the impact of ENDS use. A
          more meaningful comparisons in this regard would be between exclusive ENDS users who were
          never smokers against non-ENDS users who were never smokers. In order to quantify the benefit
          from switching, former smokers who now exclusively used ENDS should be compared with current
          smokers, accounting also for the duration of switching, duration of smoking and the quantity of
          cigarettes smoked. These aspects of study design are required to look at causation rather than just
          correlation and to account for biases that were almost always overlooked in the studies included in
          the review.
          Cigarette smokers often transition to ENDS rather than switching immediately, with 70% of e-
                                                        55
          cigarette users reporting dual use.              This review found that studies do not routinely account for dual
          use when investigating risk from ENDS with the consequence of attributing health outcomes to the
          use of ENDS when they may instead result from smoking cigarettes.
          Temporality and Reverse Causation
          A crucial and common methodological flaw was the failure to account for temporality and reverse
          causation as was seen in the 41% of studies included in our review that were cross-sectional in
                                                                                                                                       9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                               All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          design, in view of the fact that the majority of adult and adolescent users are previous or current
                       2,6
          smokers.         Furthermore, some of the health outcomes such as COPD and CVD can take up to
          decades to develop. Cross-sectional studies in current or former smokers cannot be used to establish
                                                                                                                             42
          temporal precedence as was reported in several studies, one of which has since been retracted.
          Studies reporting on mental health in particular failed to account for reverse causation.
          Publication Bias
          The ratio of studies on harm versus benefits was high with only eight studies out of 37 investigating
          potential health benefits from use of ENDS compared with cigarettes, and two investigating both
          harms and benefits. It is possible that there has been a tendency to more frequently report on
          harmful health outcomes rather than neutral or beneficial one. Indeed, we observed that some
          studies where the primary research question was to investigate harmful impact on health outcomes
          did not explicitly report findings that were either neutral or beneficial to health outcomes in the
          abstract and text of the article, focusing instead on the findings related to harms to health
                         22
          outcomes.         Future studies will need to prioritise an exploration of both potential harms and
          benefits.
          Health Outcomes
          The majority of health outcomes fell under the categories of respiratory (46%), CVD (22%), cancer
          (5%), oral health (3%) and mental health (19%). Other health outcomes included nickel contact
          dermatitis (one study), obesity (one study) and tonsillitis (one study).
          Mortality
          In the US, the CDC report that overall mortality among both male and female smokers is three times
                                                                                     56,57
          higher than that among similar people who never smoked.                          The major causes of excess mortality
                                                                                        58,59,60
          among smokers include cancer, respiratory disease and CVD,                             and some types of smokeless
                                                                                    56
          tobacco are known to cause cancer and related mortality.                     Furthermore, quitting smoking before
          the age of 40 has been shown to reduce the risk of dying from smoking-related disease by about
                 2,58
          90%.
          It is surprising, therefore, that this is not reflected in the focus of research on harms from ENDS, with
          no studies identified in the last five years looking at the association between ENDS and mortality.
          Whilst this may be partly due to the relatively recent availability of ENDS, it would be feasible to
          study mortality as an outcome in studies of high-risk groups such as CVD patients.
          Cardiovascular Disease
          There is an extensive body of evidence showing that smoking tobacco is causally related to almost all
                                     61
          major forms of CVD,            including accelerated atherosclerosis and an increased risk of acute MI,
          stroke, peripheral arterial disease (PAD), aortic aneurysm, sudden death and many risk factors for
          CHD. Among adults 55–74 years of age, an estimated two-thirds of CHD deaths are attributable to
                      62
          smoking        and the benefits of quitting smoking on reduced risk for CHD and CVD mortality have been
                                  63,64,65,66,67
          well documented.
          We had expected to see more robust studies on the impact of switching from cigarette smoking to
          ENDS. The recent availability of ENDS may be partly responsible although other diseases such as
          COPD have been reported within the same timelines.
          Our review has found that use of ENDS products has not been shown to be causative for any CVD
          outcomes and has been shown to be beneficial for patients with hypertension. Further interrogation
          using longitudinal study design and longer follow-up are needed to definitively confirm the lack of
          harm.
                                                                                                                                10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Respiratory Disease
                                                                                                                                68
          The US Surgeon General’s report in 1964 reported smoking as the most important cause of COPD
                                                                                                         62
          with a relative risk of dying of approximately 26 for men and 22 for women.                       Quitting of smoking
                                                                                                                             69
          early on in the COPD disease timeline is associated with reductions in morbidity and mortality.
          Smoking has also been shown to increase the risk of developing asthma in adolescents, and of
                                                                                        57,70
          triggering asthma attacks and worsening outcomes of attacks.                        Other lung disorders that are
                                                                                                                        57
          causally linked with smoking include tuberculosis (TB) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
          Cross sectional designs are particularly problematic as the development of COPD usually takes
                                71
          several decades.         Also, patients developing COPD would be advised to reduce or quit smoking by
          their physician and may be more likely to take up quit aids such as e-cigarettes.
          Although the results in our review are mixed, the only studies judged to be of rigorous design (i.e.
          accounting for temporality, and former and current smoking) suggest that switching from cigarettes
          to e-cigarettes results in a reduction in exacerbations of COPD, with no evidence of long-term
          deterioration in lung function. The best evidence found no increased risk of asthma in ENDS users
          who were never smokers. There is a suggestion of short-term respiratory function changes in
          asthmatics using ENDS, but we do not know if these would translate to long-term impact.
          Cancer
          The link between cancer and cigarette smoking has been extensively studied since the landmark
                                                                                                                                   72
          study to report unequivocally that smoking impacts on rates of lung cancer in doctors who smoked.
          Other smoking-related cancers are of the mouth, throat, nose, sinuses, oesophagus, bladder, kidney,
                                                                                                                      73
          ureter, pancreas, stomach, liver, cervix and ovary, bowel and acute myeloid leukaemia.
          Only two studies on cancer were identified in this review. The association of e-cigarettes in the
          causation of cancer has not been explored in clinical studies to any extent, which may in part be due
          to the lack of a plausible biological pathway.
          Oral Health
                                                                                      74
          Oral cancer is the eleventh most common cancer worldwide.                      The vast majority of studies reporting
          on oral health were on periodontal issues rather than health outcomes hence were not included.
          Oral health issues for ENDS has not been adequately studied to form any conclusion.
          Mental Health
          Particular aspects of THR in mental health patients include a high prevalence of smoking and use of
                  75,76,77
          ENDS,            preliminary evidence that ENDS are highly effective for smoking cessation in this
                   76                                                                                              78,79
          group,      and that patients with mental health issues may be more prone to addiction                         and
                                                                 75
          struggle to quit nicotine in the longer term.             Furthermore, nicotine itself may have an impact on
                                                                                   80
          symptoms and progression of the mental health condition.
          Seven studies investigating mental health outcomes were identified in this review, but there were
                                                                                                 81,82
          others reporting on mental health disease as a predictor of ENDS use.                        The use of longitudinal or
          interventional study designs is even more crucial for mental health than for other health outcome
          scenarios due to the bi-directional link between mental health disorders and use of ENDS.
          Of only two longitudinal studies on ENDS and mental health outcomes, one showed no deterioration
          in depressive symptoms and the other showed some deterioration, so no conclusion can be reached.
          Further studies are urgently required that are interventional in design and to investigate other
          health outcomes of switching from cigarettes to ENDS in this high-user patient group.
                                                                                                                                  11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Informing policy
          The findings of this review show a failure of study designs to be able to rigorously establish causation
          with regards to health outcomes from the use of ENDS products.
          The European Commission recently published its preliminary opinion on e-cigarettes stating that the
          weight of evidence is strong for risks of long-term systemic effects on the cardiovascular system,
          carcinogenicity of the respiratory tract and poisoning and injuries due to burns and explosion;
          moderate for local irritative damage to the respiratory tract and that other long-term adverse health
          effects, such as pulmonary disease, central nervous system and reprotoxic effects, cannot be
                                                               83
          established due to lack of consistent data.             The findings of our systematic review do not support
          these conclusions.
          Several of the studies included in this review that did not meet the criteria of being ‘good’ on
                                                                                                                                42
          strength of evidence or quality have been influential in determining health policy. One such study
                                                                                                84
          used data from the Population Assessment of Tobacco Health (PATH)                        database, which has also
                                                                                   20,48
          been used for several other articles included in this review.                   The study found that current e-
                                                                                              42
          cigarette users were twice as likely as never users to have had a MI.                  However, a subsequent re-
          analysis revealed that the majority of the 38 current e-cigarette users had their MI many years, on
                                                                                       85
          average a decade, before they first started using e-cigarettes.                 Despite the article being retracted by
                                       43                                                                    86            87
          the publishing journal,         the study findings had already been widely disseminated               and cited,    prior
          to its retraction with potential lasting impacts on the perception of CVD health risks from use of e-
          cigarettes.
          Another incorrect health scare informing policy from use of ENDS occurred in 2019 with the “EVALI”
          outbreak which was initially widely reported as an outbreak of lipoid pneumonia due to vaping of
                     88
          nicotine.     It was soon recognised and reported as being due to vaping of cannabinoid (THC) oils
          obtained from the black market rather than vaping of nicotine, with the CDC in the US
          recommending that adults using nicotine-containing e-cigarette, or vaping, products as an
                                                                               88
          alternative to cigarettes should not go back to smoking.
          Our review found that very few studies were sufficiently rigorous to form conclusions on health risks
          and were not rigorous enough to inform policy on tobacco harm reduction.
          The general public’s perception of health risks from ENDS does not reflect the available evidence and
                                                                                                        89
          has become more negative according to the findings from two large surveys,                       whose authors
          underscored the urgent need to accurately communicate the risks of e-cigarettes to the public,
          which should clearly differentiate the absolute from the relative (to smoking) harms of e-cigarettes.
          Strengths and Limitations
          This is the first systematic review to report on health outcomes for ENDS and has implications for
          use by policy makers. For example, current European policies requires packaging for ENDS products
          to report the same information on toxicity and addictiveness as for cigarettes and tobacco
                      90
          products.      The European Commission has a consultation currently open on the health impact from
                  83
          ENDS.      The findings of this study should form part of the scientific basis for such policies.
          One limitation is that the authors assessing the quality of the studies were not blinded to the
          authors of the included studies, however standard protocols for systematic reviews were followed,
          with blinded independent reviews for level of evidence and quality, and very high (94%) inter-rater
          agreement.
                                                                                                                                 12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          We sought to identify only those articles where health outcomes from use of ENDS were the main
          research question. As such, our search was limited to searching for search terms in the title and our
          findings represent a reflection of the key studies in this field. The key health outcomes under
          investigation were mortality, CVD, respiratory and cancer as these make up the major health
          concerns from ENDS. We also searched for general health outcomes to identify the breadth of health
          outcomes being reported. There may be other research studies where health outcome was a
          secondary research question or fell outside of our search terms which may not have been captured
          in our study.
          Our definition of ENDS did not include heat-not-burn devices, however a search using the same
          search protocol did not find any articles on the impact on health outcomes from heat-not-burn
          products.
          We were unable to study the differential impact from various types of ENDS products and different
          constituent compounds (e.g., in nicotine fluid). In addition, different types of ENDS have different
          levels of nicotine delivery and addictive properties, which are likely to change the harmful effects
          (from components other than nicotine) of any product due to type of use (e.g. magnitude, time,
          etc.).
          Conclusion
          This review of studies published over the last 5 years suggests the majority of studies on the use of
          ENDS products reported on negative health impacts with few reporting on health outcomes from
          switching from cigarettes to e-cigarettes. The strength of evidence and quality of the published
          studies is generally poor, yet some of these studies have been used to inform policy and are likely to
          have influenced public perception of health risks from use of ENDS. Several factors suggest the
          possibility of publication bias away from neutral or negative findings of harm to health outcomes
          from ENDS use.
          Our review has demonstrated that ENDS use is not causative for any harmful CVD outcomes, and to
          the contrary, may be beneficial for hypertensive patients. Switching from cigarettes to e-cigarettes
          resulted in reduced exacerbations of COPD, with no evidence of long-term respiratory harm or
          deterioration in lung function. There was a suggestion from one study of short-term reductions in
          respiratory function in asthmatics, but no increased risk of asthma in ENDS users has been shown.
          Other health outcomes such as mental health, cancer and mortality have not been adequately
          studied to form a consensus on the health impact from ENDS use. However, the findings of our
          review did not negate the consensus held by many that ENDS use is safer than the risks posed from
          smoking cigarettes.
          Overall, our review found very few studies were sufficiently rigorous to form conclusions on health
          risks. The research on ENDS use is not yet adequate to provide quantitative estimates about health
          risks. Consequently, the current body of evidence is inadequate for informing policy around tobacco
          harm reduction.
                                                                                                                                13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Author Contributions:
          CH, ES and RP designed the study, conducted data extraction, analysis and review. CH and ES wrote
          the manuscript; SS, RN, PT and RP reviewed and edited the manuscript.
          Funding disclosure:
          The paper was produced in part with the help of a grant from the Foundation for a Smoke Free
          World, Inc. ECLAT, a spin-off of the University of Catania, is the grant holder.
          The contents, selection and presentation of facts, as well as any opinions expressed in the paper are
          the sole responsibility of the authors and under no circumstances shall be regarded as reflecting the
          positions of the Foundation for a Smoke-Free World, Inc. The Grantor had no role in the selection of
          the research topic, study design, or the writing of the paper or the project.
          Declaration of interests:
          CH received reimbursement from ECLAT for research conducted on tobacco harm reduction (2019–
          2020) including this article; she has served as a paid member of the advisory panel for the Tobacco
          Transformation Index (contracted by Sustainability, Sept 2019– April 2020); she is a paid consultant
          to TEVA pharmaceuticals on work related to multiple chronic conditions (2017 to present). ES
          received reimbursement from ECLAT for research conducted on tobacco harm reduction (2019–
          2020) including this article. SS has no conflict of interest to declare. RN has no affiliation with, nor
          does he accept funding from any tobacco, nicotine or vaping commercial or charitable interests
          including the FSFW. PF has no conflict of interest to declare. RP is full-time employee of the
          University of Catania, Italy. In relation to his work in the area of tobacco control and respiratory
          diseases, RP has received lecture fees and research funding from Pfizer, GlaxoSmithKline, CV
          Therapeutics, NeuroSearch A/S, Sandoz, MSD, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Duska Therapeutics,
          and Forest Laboratories. He has also served as a consultant for Pfizer, Global Health Alliance for
          treatment of tobacco dependence, CV Therapeutics, NeuroSearch A/S, Boehringer Ingelheim,
          Novartis, Duska Therapeutics, Alfa-Wassermann, Forest Laboratories, ECITA (Electronic Cigarette
          Industry Trade Association, in the UK), Arbi Group Srl., and Health Diplomats. RP is the Founder of
          the Center of Excellence for the acceleration of Harm Reduction at the University of Catania
          (CoEHAR), which has received a grant from Foundation for a Smoke Free World to develop and carry
          out eight research projects. RP is also currently involved in the following pro bono activities:
          scientific advisor for LIAF, Lega Italiana Anti Fumo (Italian acronym for Italian Anti-Smoking League)
          and Chair of the European Technical Committee for standardization on "Requirements and test
          methods for emissions of electronic cigarettes" (CEN/TC 437; WG4).
                                                                                                                                14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          References
          1
            World Health Organization. “Tobacco: Key facts”. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
          sheets/detail/tobacco (accessed August, 2020).
          2
            McNeill, Ann, et al. “Evidence review of e-cigarettes and heated tobacco products 2018.” A report
          commissioned by Public Health England. London: Public Health England 6 (2018).
          3
            Public Health England. “E-cigarettes: an evidence update”. (2015). Available:
          https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/e-cigarettes-an-evidence-update (accessed August,
          2020)
          4
            Hajek, P., et al. "A Randomized Trial of E-Cigarettes Versus Nicotine-Replacement Therapy." N Engl
          J Med 380.7 (2019): 629-37.
          5
            McRobbie, H., et al. "Electronic Cigarettes for Smoking Cessation and Reduction." Cochrane
          Database Syst Rev.12 (2014): CD010216.
          6
            "Quickstats: Cigarette Smoking Status among Current Adult E-Cigarette Users" MMWR Morb
          Mortal Wkly Rep 65.42 (2016): 1177.
          7
            Public Health England. “E-cigarettes: an evidence update”. (2015). Available:
          https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/e-cigarettes-an-evidence-update (accessed August,
          2020)
          8
            Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & Group, P. (2009). Preferred reporting items for
          systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA Statement. Open Med, 3(3), e123-130.
          9
            Center for Evidence-Based Medicine. “Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine – Levels of
          Evidence.” (2009). Available: https://www.cebm.net/2009/06/oxford-centre-evidence-based-
          medicine-levels-evidence-march-2009/ (Accessed January, 2020).
          10
             NIH. “Study Quality Assessment Tools”. Available: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-
          quality-assessment-tools (accessed March, 2020).
          11
             Polosa, R., et al. "Blood Pressure Control in Smokers with Arterial Hypertension Who Switched to
          Electronic Cigarettes." Int J Environ Res Public Health 13.11 (2016).
          12
             Farsalinos, K., et al. "Effect of Continuous Smoking Reduction and Abstinence on Blood Pressure
          and Heart Rate in Smokers Switching to Electronic Cigarettes." Intern Emerg Med 11.1 (2016): 85-94.
          13
             Osei, A. D., et al. “Association between e-cigarette use and cardiovascular disease among never
          and current combustible-cigarette smokers.” Am J Med 132.8, 949-954 (2019).
          14
             Farsalinos, K., et al. "Is e-cigarette use associated with coronary heart disease and myocardial
          infarction? Insights from the 2016 and 2017 National Health Interview Surveys." Ther Adv Chronic Dis
          10 (2019): 1–10
          15
             Alzahrani, T., et al. "Association between Electronic Cigarette Use and Myocardial Infarction." Am J
          Prev Med 55.4 (2018): 455-61.
          16
             Parekh, T., S. Pemmasani, and R. Desai. "Risk of Stroke with E-Cigarette and Combustible Cigarette
          Use in Young Adults." Am J Prev Med 58.3 (2020): 446-52.
          17
             Bowler, R. P., et al. "Electronic Cigarette Use in Us Adults at Risk for or with COPD: Analysis from
          Two Observational Cohorts." J Gen Intern Med 32.12 (2017): 1315-22.
          18
             Polosa, R., et al. "Health Effects in COPD Smokers Who Switch to Electronic Cigarettes: A
          Retrospective-Prospective 3-Year Follow-Up." Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 13 (2018): 2533-42
          (2018).
          19
             Osei, A. D., et al. “Association between e-cigarette use and cardiovascular disease among never
          and current combustible-cigarette smokers.” Am J Med 132.8, 949-954 (2019).
          20
             Perez, M. F., et al. "Adult E-Cigarettes Use Associated with a Self-Reported Diagnosis of Copd." Int J
          Environ Res Public Health 16.20 (2019).
          21
             Wills, T. A., et al. "E-Cigarette Use and Respiratory Disorder in an Adult Sample." Drug Alcohol
          Depend 194 (2019): 363-70.
          22
             Xie, Zidian, et al. "Use of Electronic Cigarettes and Self-Reported Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
          Disease Diagnosis in Adults." Nicotine and Tobacco Research 22.7 (2020): 1155-1161.
                                                                                                                                15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          23
             Løkke, A., et al. "Developing Copd: A 25 Year Follow up Study of the General
          Population." Thorax 61.11 (2006): 935-9.
          24
             Cho, Jun Ho, and Samuel Y. Paik. "Association between electronic cigarette use and asthma among
          high school students in South Korea." PLoS One 11.3 (2016): e0151022.
          25
             Choi, K., and D. Bernat. "E-Cigarette Use among Florida Youth with and without Asthma." Am J
          Prev Med 51.4 (2016): 446-53.
          26
             Kim, S. Y., S. Sim, and H. G. Choi. "Active, Passive, and Electronic Cigarette Smoking Is Associated
          with Asthma in Adolescents." Sci Rep 7.1 (2017): 17789. Print.
          27
             Lappas, A. S., et al. "Short-Term Respiratory Effects of E-Cigarettes in Healthy Individuals and
          Smokers with Asthma." Respirology 23.3 (2018): 291-97.
          28
             Schweitzer, R. J., et al. "E-Cigarette Use and Asthma in a Multiethnic Sample of Adolescents." Prev
          Med 105 (2017): 226-31.
          29
             Miler, J. A., et al. "Changes in the frequency of airway infections in smokers who switched to
          vaping: results of an online survey." J Addict Res Ther 7.290 (2016): 2.
          30
             Franco, T., et al. "Electronic Cigarette: Role in the Primary Prevention of Oral Cavity Cancer." Clin
          Med Insights Ear Nose Throat 9 (2016): 7-12.
          31
             Bandiera, F. C., et al. "Depressive Symptoms Predict Current E-Cigarette Use among College
          Students in Texas." Nicotine Tob Res 19.9 (2017): 1102-06.
          32
             Lechner, W. V., et al. "Bi-Directional Associations of Electronic and Combustible Cigarette Use
          Onset Patterns with Depressive Symptoms in Adolescents." Prev Med 96 (2017): 73-78.
          33
             Dahal, R., K. Adhikari, and S. B. Patten. "Smoking Cessation and Improvement in Mental Health
          Outcomes: Do People Who Quit Smoking by Switching to Electronic Cigarettes Experience
          Improvement in Mental Health?" Can J Psychiatry 65.7 (2020): 512-14.
          34
             King, J. L., et al. "Tobacco Product Use and Mental Health Status among Young Adults." Addict
          Behav 77 (2018): 67-72.
          35
             Chadi, Nicholas, et al. "Depressive Symptoms and Suicidality in Adolescents Using e-Cigarettes and
          Marijuana: A Secondary Data Analysis From the Youth Risk Behavior Survey." Journal of addiction
          medicine 13.5 (2019): 362-365.
          36
             Pham, T., et al. "Electronic Cigarette Use and Mental Health: A Canadian Population-Based
          Study." J Affect Disord 260 (2020): 646-52.
          37
              Akinkugbe, A. A. "Cigarettes, E-Cigarettes, and Adolescents' Oral Health: Findings from the
          Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (Path) Study." JDR Clin Trans Res 4.3 (2019): 276-83.
          38
             Lanza, H. I., P. Pittman, and J. Batshoun. "Obesity and Cigarette Smoking: Extending the Link to E-
          Cigarette/Vaping Use." Am J Health Behav 41.3 (2017): 338-47.
          39
             Maridet, C., et al. "The Electronic Cigarette: The New Source of Nickel Contact Allergy of the 21st
          Century?" Contact Dermatitis 73.1 (2015): 49-50.
          40
             Adkison, S. E., et al. "Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems: International Tobacco Control Four-
          Country Survey." Am J Prev Med 44.3 (2013): 207-15.
          41
             Kruse, G. R., S. Kalkhoran, and N. A. Rigotti. "Use of Electronic Cigarettes among U.S. Adults with
          Medical Comorbidities." Am J Prev Med 52.6 (2017): 798-804.
          42
             Bhatta, D. N., & Glantz, S. A. “Electronic cigarette use and myocardial infarction among adults in
          the US population assessment of tobacco and health.” J Am Heart Assoc 8.12, e012317 (2019).
          43
             Retraction to: Electronic Cigarette Use and Myocardial Infarction Among Adults in the US
          Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health. Available:
          https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.119.014519 (accessed August, 2020)
          44
             Connor Gorber, S., et al. "The Accuracy of Self-Reported Smoking: A Systematic Review of the
          Relationship between Self-Reported and Cotinine-Assessed Smoking Status." Nicotine Tob Res 11.1
          (2009): 12-24.
                                                                                                                                16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          45
             Vingilis, E. R., T. J. Wade, and J. S. Seeley. "Predictors of Adolescent Self-Rated Health. Analysis of
          the National Population Health Survey." Can J Public Health 93.3 (2002): 193-7.
          46
             Inoue-Choi, M., et al. "Dose-Response Association of Low-Intensity and Nondaily Smoking with
          Mortality in the United States." JAMA Netw Open 3.6 (2020): e206436.
          47
             Akinkugbe, A. A. "Cigarettes, E-Cigarettes, and Adolescents' Oral Health: Findings from the
          Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (Path) Study." JDR Clin Trans Res 4.3 (2019): 276-83.
          48
             Bhatta, D. N., and S. A. Glantz. "Association of E-Cigarette Use with Respiratory Disease among
          Adults: A Longitudinal Analysis." Am J Prev Med 58.2 (2020): 182-90.
          49
             Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Adult Tobacco Use Information.” Available:
          https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/tobacco/tobacco_glossary.htm (accessed August, 2020).
          50
              Grant, J. E., et al. "E-Cigarette Use (Vaping) Is Associated with Illicit Drug Use, Mental Health
          Problems, and Impulsivity in University Students." Ann Clin Psychiatry 31.1 (2019): 27-35.
          51
              Chadi, Nicholas, et al. "Depressive Symptoms and Suicidality in Adolescents Using e-Cigarettes and
          Marijuana: A Secondary Data Analysis From the Youth Risk Behavior Survey." Journal of addiction
          medicine 13.5 (2019): 362-365.
          52
             Boyle, R. G., S. Richter, and S. Helgertz. "Who Is Using and Why: Prevalence and Perceptions of
          Using and Not Using Electronic Cigarettes in a Statewide Survey of Adults." Addict Behav Rep 10
          (2019): 100227.
          53
             Filippidis, F. T., et al. Two-Year Trends and Predictors of E-Cigarette Use in 27 European Union
          Member States." Tob Control 26.1 (2017): 98-104.
          54
             Kinouani, S., et al. "Motivations for Using Electronic Cigarettes in Young Adults: A Systematic
          Review." Subst Abus 41.3 (2020): 315-22.doi:10.1080/08897077.2019.1671937
          55
             National Academy of Sciences. Public health consequences of e-cigarettes. National Academies
          Press, 2018
          56
             Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Tobacco-Related Mortality. Available:
          https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/health_effects/tobacco_related_mortalit
          y/index.html (accessed August, 2020)
          57
             US National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and
          Health,. "The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon
          General." 2014.
          58
             Jha, P., et al. "21st-Century Hazards of Smoking and Benefits of Cessation in the United States." N
          Engl J Med 368.4 (2013): 341-50.
          59
             US Office of the Surgeon General, and Office on Smoking and Health. "The Health Consequences of
          Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General." 2004.
          60
             National Cancer Institute. Cigars: Health Effects and Trends. Smoking and Tobacco Control
          Monograph No. 9. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National
          Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, 1998. (Accessed August, 2020).
          61
             US Department of Health and Human Services. "Surgeon General’s report: The health
          consequences of smoking—50 years of progress." Rockville: Public Health Service, Office of the
          Surgeon General (2014).
          62
             Thun, M. J., et al. "50-Year Trends in Smoking-Related Mortality in the United States." N Engl J
          Med 368.4 (2013): 351-64.
          63
             Samet, J. M. "The 1990 Report of the Surgeon General: The Health Benefits of Smoking
          Cessation." Am Rev Respir Dis 142.5 (1990): 993-4.
          64
             US Surgeon General. "The health consequences of smoking: a report of the Surgeon
          General." Atlanta. GA: Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Office of Smoking and Health.
          Available: http://www. cdc. gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/sgr_2004/chapters. htm (2004).
          65
             US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
          and Health Promotion (US), and Office on Smoking and Health (US). "How Tobacco Smoke Causes
                                                                                                                                17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                             All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon
          General." 2010.
          66
             Anthonisen, N. R., et al. "The Effects of a Smoking Cessation Intervention on 14.5-Year Mortality: A
          Randomized Clinical Trial." Ann Intern Med 142.4 (2005): 233-9.
          67
             Vollset, S. E., A. Tverdal, and H. K. Gjessing. "Smoking and Deaths between 40 and 70 Years of Age
          in Women and Men." Ann Intern Med 144.6 (2006): 381-9.
          68
             US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare [USDHEW] 1964, p. 31
          69
             Pride, N. B. "Smoking Cessation: Effects on Symptoms, Spirometry and Future Trends in
          Copd." Thorax 56 Suppl 2 (2001): ii7-10.
          70
             US Department of Health and Human Services. How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: What It
          Means to You. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
          and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
          Smoking and Health, 2010 [accessed 2017 Apr 20].
          71
             Løkke, A., et al. "Developing Copd: A 25 Year Follow up Study of the General
          Population." Thorax 61.11 (2006): 935-9.
          72
             Doll, R., et al. "The mortality of doctors in relation to their smoking habits." British medical
          journal 1.4877 (1954): 1451.
          73
             Smoke, Tobacco, and Involuntary Smoking. "IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic
          risks to humans." IARC, Lyon (2004): 1-1452.
          74
             World Health Organization. “Global facts on tobacco or oral health.” Available:
          https://www.who.int/oral_health/publications/fact_sheet_tobacco/en/index1.html (accessed
          August, 2020)
          75
             Spears, C. A., et al. "Electronic Nicotine Delivery System (Ends) Use in Relation to Mental Health
          Conditions, Past-Month Serious Psychological Distress and Cigarette Smoking Status,
          2017." Addiction 114.2 (2019): 315-25.
          76
             Cummins, S. E., et al. "Use of E-Cigarettes by Individuals with Mental Health Conditions." Tob
          Control 23 Suppl 3 (2014): iii48-53.
          77
             Spears, Claire Adams, et al. "Use of electronic nicotine delivery systems among adults with mental
          health conditions, 2015." International journal of environmental research and public health 14.1
          (2017): 10.
          78
             Goodkind, M., et al. "Identification of a Common Neurobiological Substrate for Mental
          Illness." JAMA Psychiatry 72.4 (2015): 305-15.
          79
             Dome, P., et al. "Smoking, Nicotine and Neuropsychiatric Disorders." Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34.3
          (2010): 295-342.
          80
             Brown, J. E. H., C. Gartner, and A. Carter. "Can E-Cigarettes Improve the Well-Being of People with
          Mental Health Disorders?" Int J Drug Policy 73 (2019): 170-71.
          81
             Riehm, K. E., et al. "Mental Health Problems and Initiation of E-Cigarette and Combustible
          Cigarette Use." Pediatrics 144.1 (2019).
          82
             Park, S. H., et al. "Patterns of Electronic Cigarette Use and Level of Psychological Distress." PLoS
          One 12.3 (2017): e0173625.
          83
             Scientific Committee on Health, Environmental and Emerging Risks SCHEER Preliminary Opinion on
                                         rd
          electronic cigarettes. 23         September 2020. Available at
          https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/scientific_committees/scheer/docs/scheer_o_017.pd
          f Accessed on 1st October 2020.
          84
             Population Assessment of Tobacco Health (PATH). Available:
          https://pathstudyinfo.nih.gov/UI/HomeMobile.aspx (access August, 2020).
          85
             Rodu, B. “Comment: Electronic Cigarette Use and Myocardial Infarction Among Adults in the US
          Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health.” Available:
          https://pubpeer.com/publications/F177153E02CA8B3E7B9E70BC8DB204 (accessed August, 2020).
                                                                                                                                18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          86
             Glantz SA. “More evidence that e-cigs cause heart attacks, this time from PATH.” Center for
          Tobacco Control Research and Education, University of California San Francisco (2019). Available at:
          https://tobacco.ucsf.edu/more-evidence-e-cigs-cause-heart-attacks-time-path
          87
             Google Scholar. Citations: Electronic cigarette use and myocardial infarction among adults in the
          US population assessment of tobacco and health. Available:
          https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=stanton+glantz+myocardial+infarction
          +2019&btnG (accessed August, 2020).
          88
             Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Smoking and Tobbaco Use: For Healthcare
          Providers.” Available: https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-
          disease/healthcare-providers/index.html (accessed August, 2020).
          89
             Huang, J., et al. "Changing Perceptions of Harm of E-Cigarette Vs Cigarette Use among Adults in 2
          US National Surveys from 2012 to 2017." JAMA Netw Open 2.3 (2019): e191047.
          90
             Article 20 of the Tobacco Products Directive (2014/40/EU). Available:
          https://ec.europa.eu/health/tobacco/ecigarettes_en (Accessed October 2020).
                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                               medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      Table 1.   Number of Studies by Health Outcome and Study Design
                                CANCER        RESPIRATO     CARDIOVASCU    MENTAL   ORAL      MORTALITY   OTHER   TOTAL
                                              RY            LAR            HEALTH   HEALTH
       MA / POOLED DATA                       1                                                           1       1
                          RCT                               1                                                     1
                     COHORT                   2                            2                                      4
                                                                                                                                  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
         CROSS-SECTIONAL        1             11            5              5        1                     1       24
            CASE-CONTROL                                    1                                                     1
                 ECOLOGICAL                                                                                       0
                 CASE REPORT    1             3             1                                             1       6
                 ALL ARTICLES   2             17            7              7        1         0           3       37
      Table 2.   Study Design by Reporting of Harms and Benefits
                                         HARMS                  BENEFITS            BOTH/NEUTRAL
META-ANALYSIS/POOLED DATA                1
                                                                                                                                                                           All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
RCT                                                             1
COHORT                                   1                      1                   2
CROSS-SECTIONAL                          20                     4
ECOLOGICAL
CASE-CONTROL                                                    1
CASE REPORT                              5                      1
ALL ARTICLES                             27                     8                   2
                                                                                                                          20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
                                                                                                                                         21
                                                                                                     20 (54%)
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     3 (43%)
                                                                                     11 (65%)
                                                                  POOR
                                                                                     0 (0%)
                                                                                     1 (100%)
                                                                                     4 (57%)
                                                                                     1 (33%)
          Quality Ratings Assigned to studies by Health Outcome
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     9 (24%)
                                                                                     2 (29%)
                                                                                     3 (18%)
                                                                                     2 (100%)
                                                                  FAIR
                                                                                     0 (0%)
                                                                                     1 (14%)
                                                                                     1 (33%)
                                                                                                     8 (22%)
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     2 (29%)
                                                                  GOOD
                                                                                     3 (18%)
                                                                                     0 (0%)
                                                                                     0 (0%)
                                                                                     2 (29%)
                                                                                     1 (33%)
                                                                  HEALTH OUTCOME
                                                                                     MORTALITY
                                                                                     CVD
                                                                                     RESPIRATORY
                                                                                     CANCER
                                   Table 3.
                                                                                     ORAL HEALTH
                                                                                                     TOTAL
                                                                                     MENTAL HEALTH
                                                                                   ENDS
                                                                                     OTHER

                                                                                                                                                                               medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
          Table 4. Description of Studies, Level of Evidence and Quality for Health Outcomes from ENDS.
Benefit                                       Study Design &                                                                                       Level of
                                    Country                            Key outcomes             Impact on Health Outcome                                      Quality
or        Reference                           Number of subjects,                                                                                  Evidenc
                                                                       assessed                                                                               Rating
harm                                          country                                                                                              e
Cardiovascular
        Farsalinos, et al. Effect
        of continuous smoking                 Prospective, double-
        reduction and
                                                                                                                                                                                  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    Italy     blind, controlled,                                Reduced SBP (from 141 to 132 mmHg, p<0.001)
Benefit abstinence   on blood
        pressure and heart                    three-arm RCT on 145 Clinic
                                                                   and  HR
                                                                          measured SBP          in hypertensives switching to EC at 12 months;           1B            Good
        rate in smokers                       hypertensive smokers                              those continuing to smoke had no reduction.
        switching to electronic               switching to EC
        cigarettes.
        Alzahrani, et al.                                                                       Self-reported daily EC users more likely to
        Association between                   Cross-sectional survey Self-reported MI           report MI compared with never EC users (OR=
Harm electronic cigarette           United    on                                                1.79; 95% CI: 1.20-2.66). Compared to never              2C             Poor
        use and myocardial          States    69,04 subjects                                    users of e-cigarettes and cigarettes, daily dual
        infarction.                                                                             users of e-cigarettes and cigarettes were more
                                                                                                likely to have an MI (OR=4.62)
        Farsalinos, et al. Is e-                                                                Self-reported daily EC use not associated with
        cigarette use                         Cross-sectional survey Self-reported MI and       MI (OR= 1.35; 95% CI:0.80–2.27) compared
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Harm associated      with
        coronary heart
                                    Italy     in 2016 (n = 33,028)                              with never EC use after accounting for dual use          2C             Fair
        disease and                           and 2017 (n = 26,742) CHD                         and former smoking; no association between
                                                                                                EC use and CHD compared with never EC use
        myocardial infarction?                                                                  (OR= 1.31; 95% CI:0.79-2.17)
        Osei, et al. Association              Cross-sectional survey CVD (defined as Self-      Self-reported EC using never-smokers had no
                                              on 449,092             reported CHD, MI,
Harm between
        use and
                  e-cigarette
                                              participants           stroke)
                                                                                                increased CVD (OR= 1.04; 95% CI: 0.63-1.72) or
                                                                                                premature CVD (OR=1.01; 95% CI: 0.56-1.83)               2C             Poor
                                    United
        cardiovascular disease      States                                                      compared with never EC users; EC using
                                                                                                                                                                  22

                                                                                                                                                                 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         among never and                                                                     former-smokers were more likely to report CVD
         current combustible-                                                                (OR= 1.36; 95% CI= 1.18-1.56) and premature
         cigarette smokers.                                                                  CVD (OR=1.45; 95% CI: 1.20-1.74) compared
                                                                                             with never EC users. Dual smoking and EC use
                                                                                             was associated with higher CVD (OR=1.36; 95%
                                                                                             CI: 1.18-1.56).
                                                                                             Self-reported EC using never-smokers had no
         Parekh, et al. Risk of United                                                       higher risk of stroke (OR=0.69, 95% CI: 0.34,
         Stroke With E-         States     Cross-sectional survey                            1.42) compared with nonsmokers; risk of stroke
Harm     Cigarette and                     on 161,529             Self-reported stroke       was lower for EC users compared with current      2C         Fair
         Combustible Cigarette             participants aged                                 exclusive smokers (OR=0.43, 95% CI: 0.20,
                                                                                                                                                                    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
         Use in Young Adults.              18−44 years                                       0.93). Current EC using former smokers had
                                                                                             increased odds of stroke (OR=2.54; 95% CI:
                                                                                             1.16-5.56) compared with never -smokers.
        Polosa, et al. Blood               Observational study of                            A significant reduction in median SBP (from 140
        pressure control in                89 hypertensive                                   to 130 mmHg; p < 0.001) and DBP (from 86-80
Benefit smokers  with arterial Italy
        hypertension who
                                           smokers who quit or Office SBP and DBP
                                           reduced tobacco
                                                                                             mmHg; p = 0.006) at 12-month follow-up in the
                                                                                             exclusive EC group. No change in SBP or DBP       3B        Good
        switched to electronic             consumption                                       seen in reduced cigarette consumption dual
        cigarettes.                        by switching to EC.                               users at 12 months.
Respiratory
                                                                                             Self-reported ever use of EC associated with 8%
         Bowler, et al.                    Pooled results from     COPD respiratory          (±2%) increased prevalence of chronic
         Electronic cigarette              two cohort studies in   symptoms or disease       bronchitis and (in 1 cohort) COPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
                                  United
Harm     use in US adults at risk States   4,596 current or        progression (GOLD         exacerbations compared with never EC users (p     2A        Good
         for or with COPD:                 former smokers          criteria used to assess   = 0.01); after 5 years, no increase in
         analysis from two                 Aged 45–80 with, or     COPD                      progression of lung disease or decline in lung
         observational cohorts.            at risk of, COPD        spirometric severity)     function (in one cohort). djusted for but not
                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                             excluding current smokers.
        Polosa, et al. Health              Prospective cohort      COPD exacerbations,       Improvements in COPD exacerbation rates
Benefit effects in COPD                    study of 44 COPD        post-bronchodilator       (p=0.004), CAT scores (p=0.019) and 6-minute      2B        Good
        smokers who switch       Italy     smokers switching to    lung function, CAT        walk distance (p=0.001) in EC users compared
                                                                                                                                                    23

                                                                                                                                                                    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         to electronic                        EC use.                    scores, 6-minute       with continued smokers after 36 months.
         cigarettes: a                                                   walking distance
         retrospective-
         prospective 3-year
         follow-up.
                                              Cohort study of 54
                                              dual smokers (EC and
                                   Greece     smoking), 27 (50%)         Impulse oscillometry   MA group exhibited higher baseline values and
                                              with mild asthma           impedance (Z),         more prominent effect after EC use using
         Lappas, et al.                       (MA), 27 (50%) no          resistance (R),        standardized puffing sessions vs. healthy
         Short-term respiratory               asthma, underwent a        reactance (X) and      participants after EC use for respiratory system
                                                                                                                                                                       (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
Harm     effects of e-cigarettes              control session (no        fractional exhaled     total impedance at 5 Hz (P = 0.022), respiratory   2B        Poor
         in healthy individuals               liquid, no resistor coil   nitric oxide (FeNO)    system resistance at 5 Hz (P = 0.010) and
         and smokers with                     inside e-cigarette         were measured          respiratory system resistance at 10 Hz (P =
         asthma.                              cartridge) and an          before and 0, 15 and   0.013). Fractional exhaled nitric oxide
                                              experimental               30 min after control   decreased significantly in both groups (P <
                                              session of EC using        and experimental       0.001)
                                              standardized puffing       sessions.
                                              settings.
        Polosa, et al. Evidence               Retrospective chart                               Reduction in annual COPD exacerbations for
        for harm reduction in                 review with 12 and 24      Verified COPD          heavy smokers with COPD switching to EC
        COPD smokers who        Italy         month follow-up on         exacerbations in       (mean 2.3 at baseline to 1.8; p=0.002) at 12
Benefit switch to electronic                  48 heavy smokers           previous 12 months     months and to 1.4 ;p< 0.001) at 24 months,: no     2C        Good
        cigarettes.                           with COPD invited to                              change in COPD exacerbations for those not
                                              switch to e-cigarettes                            switching.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
        Miler, et al. Changes
        in the frequency of        Germany Cross-sectional survey                               Among those who switched to EC, 66% (95%
        airway infections in               of 914 smokers who      Self-reported                CI=62.9-69.0) reported improvement in
Benefit smokers who                        switched to             respiratory infections       respiratory infections, 29% reported no change,    2C        Poor
        switched to vaping:                vaping for at least two (e.g., common cold)          5% reported worsening.
        results of an online               months.
        survey.
                                                                                                                                                        24

                                                                                                                                                             medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       Bhatta, et al.                                                                    Among never smokers, current self-reported EC
       Association of e-                  Cross-sectional survey
       cigarette use with                 of 705,159             Self-reported chronic   use associated with chronic bronchitis,
Harm                             United                          bronchitis,             emphysema and COPD compared with never EC          2C        Poor
       respiratory disease       States   participants
       among adults: a                                           emphysema, COPD         users (OR=1.75, 95% CI: 1.25-2.45); daily EC use
       longitudinal analysis.                                                            had higher odds (OR=2.64, 95% CI:1.43, 4.89).
       Cho, et al. Association
       between electronic        South
       cigarette use and         Korea    Cross-sectional survey
       asthma among high                  of                     Self-reported asthma    Among self-reported never smokers, current EC
Harm   school students in                 35,904 high school     diagnosis               use associated with asthma (OR=2.74; 95% CI:       2C        Poor
                                                                                                                                                                (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
       South Korea.                       students                                       1.30–5.78) compared with never EC users.
       There are no sources
       in the current
       document.
                                                                                         Among those with asthma, self-reported past
       Choi, K., & Bernat, D.                                                            30–day EC use (any quantity) associated with
       (2016). E-cigarette use United     Cross-sectional survey Self-reported asthma    asthma attacks (OR=1.78, 95% CI: 1.20-2.64) in
Harm   among Florida youth States         of 36,085 high school and asthma attack        the past 12 months compared with non EC            2C        Poor
       with and without                   students                                       users in past 30 days (adjusted for days smoked
       asthma.                                                                           cigarettes in the past 30 days but smokers not
                                                                                         excluded)
                                                                                         Self-reported EC use group associated with
       Kim, et al. Active,                                                               higher prevalence of asthma (OR=1.13; 95%CI:
                                          Cross-sectional survey                         1.01–1.26) compared with never EC users
                                                                                                                                                                                                         All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
       passive, and electronic            of 216,056                                     (adjusting for active, passive cigarette use);
Harm   cigarette smoking is               adolescents aged 12- Self-reported asthma      greater use of e-cigarettes associated with        2C        Poor
       associated with         South
                               Korea      18 years                                       asthma, 1-5 days/month (OR=1.39; 95% CI:
       asthma in                                                                         1.19-1.61), 6-19 days/month (OR=1.31; 95% CI:
       adolescents.                                                                      1.08-1.61) and >20 days/month (OR=1.58; 95%
                                                                                         CI: 1.40-1.78) compared with never EC use.
                                                                                                                                                 25

                                                                                                                                                            medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       Osei, et al. Association                                                          Self-reported non-current smokers using EC
       Between E-Cigarette United                                                        associated with a COPD diagnosis (OR=2.94,
       Use and Chronic          States     Cross-sectional survey Self-reported COPD     95% CI: 1.73–4.99) compared with non-EC use.
       Obstructive                         on                                            Compared with never smokers who never used
Harm   Pulmonary Disease by                5,454 participants     diagnosis                                                                2C        Poor
       Smoking Status:                                                                   EC, dual users (smoking and EC) had the highest
       Behavioral Risk Factor                                                            odds of COPD (OR=6.89, 95% CI=6.29, 7.55).
       Surveillance System                                                               Former smoking was not excluded or
       2016 and 2017.                                                                    accounted for.
       Perez, et al. Adult e-
                                                                                                                                                               (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
       cigarettes use                      Cross-sectional survey Self-reported COPD     Self-reported EC users had greater odds of
Harm   associated with a self- United      of 32,320 adults and diagnosis                COPD than non- EC users (OR=1.43, 95% CI:         2C        Poor
       reported diagnosis of States        adolescents aged 12–                          1.12–1.85) in adults and children combined.
       COPD.                               17 years
       Schweitzer, et al. E-                                                             Current self-reported EC use associated with
       cigarette use and                                                                 asthma (OR=1.48; 95% CI: 1.24–1.78) and with
Harm   asthma in a                         Cross-sectional survey Self-reported asthma   previous asthma (OR=1.20; 95% CI: 1.00–1.44)      2C        Poor
                                  United   of 6,082 adolescents diagnosis                compared with never EC use, (controlling for
       multiethnic sample of      States                                                 but not excluding current cigarette smoking, or
       adolescents.                                                                      former smoking).
                                                                                                                                                                                                        All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
                                                                                         Self-reported ever EC use associated with
       Wills et al. E-cigarette            Cross-sectional                               asthma in current non-smokers (OR = 1.33, 95%
       use and respiratory        United   random-dial            Self-reported asthma   CI: 1.00–1.77, p<.05) but not in smokers
Harm   disorder in an adult       States   telephone survey on    or COPD diagnosis      (OR=0.92, 95% CI: 0.73–1.15, EC use was not       2C        Fair
       sample.                             8,087 adults                                  associated with COPD in current non-smokers
                                                                                         (OR = 2.98, 95% CI: 1.51–5.88, p < .01) or in
                                                                                         current smokers (OR = 1.29, 95%CI 0.94 −1.77).
                                                                                         There was no significant difference in risk of
                                                                                                                                                26

                                                                                                                                                             medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                                                                          asthma among dual users compared with sole
                                                                                          EC users (OR=1.00; 95%CI: 0.73-1.35) or
                                                                                          smokers (OR=0.99; 95%CI: 0.80-1.22). There
                                                                                          was increased risk of COPD in smokers
                                                                                          (OR=2.98; 95%CI: 2.34-3.78), EC users
                                                                                          (OR=2.58; 95%CI: 1.36-4.89) and dual users
                                                                                          (OR=3.92; 95%CI: 2.82-5.44) compared with
                                                                                          never smokers who never used EC. Ever EC use
                                                                                          included any quantity ever used.
       Xie, et al. Use of                                                                 Self-reported current vapers who never
       Electronic Cigarettes              Cross-sectional survey Self-reported COPD
                                                                                                                                                                (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
       and Self-Reported         United   of 887,182                                      smoked more likely to self-report COPD
Harm                                      participants           diagnosis                (OR=1.47; 95% CI: 1.01, 2.12) compared with       2C        Fair
       Chronic Obstructive       States                                                   never smokers (smoked less than 100
       Pulmonary Disease                                                                  cigarettes, not currently vaping).
       Diagnosis in Adults.
       Sommerfeld et al.                  Case study, 18 year     Hypersensitivity
       Hypersensitivity                   old woman with          Pneumonitis             Case study of single EC user developing
Harm   pneumonitis and           United   dyspnea, cough, and     and acute respiratory   sensitivity pneumonitis. Did not report on         4        Fair
       acute respiratory         States   pleuritic chest pain    distress                comorbidities or smoking
       distress syndrome                  after e-cigarette use   syndrome
       from e-cigarette use.
       Khan, et al. Organizing                                                         Single case study of organizing pneumonia,
       pneumonia related to               Case study, 40-year-                         exclusion of other drug use and comorbidities
Harm   electronic cigarette      United   old female patient      Organising pneumonia not mentioned.                                        4        Poor
                                                                                                                                                                                                         All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
       use: a case report and    States
       review of literature.
       Carter, et al. Life-               Case study, 35-year-
       threatening vesicular              old female presented
       bronchial injury          United   to emergency            Vesicular Bronchial     Case study showed vesicular bronchial injury in
Harm   requiring veno-venous     States   department with         Injury                  an EC user. Patient had CVD and other              4        Poor
       extracorporeal                     chest pain and                                  comorbidities and was a former smoker.
       membrane                           dyspnea
       oxygenation rescue in
                                                                                                                                                 27

                                                                                                                                                                   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
         an electronic nicotine
         delivery system user.
Cancer
                                            Cross-sectional survey
                                            on 65 previous
                                            smokers (from
        Franco, et al.            Italy     outpatient center), e-   Total number of oral     Self-reported EC users had lower micronuclei
        Electronic cigarette:               cigarette smokers        mucosa pre-cancerous     compared with smokers based on
                                                                                                                                                                      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
Benefit role in the primary                 (from monthly            (micronucleated) cells   micronucleated cells/1000 cells (P = 0.001) and     2C        Fair
        prevention of oral                  prevention               from cytologic           micronuclei/1000 cells (P = 0.004)
        cavity cancer.                      campaigns), and          examination
                                            nonsmokers (from
                                            university medical and
                                            paramedical staff)
         Nguyen, et al. Oral      United    Case study of 2                                   Two cases of oral carcinoma associated with
         carcinoma associated     States,   subjects                 Oral carcinoma
Harm     with chronic use of      Vietnam                                                     13-year use of EC. Description of other risks not    4        Fair
         electronic cigarettes.                                                               detailed eg smoking.
Oral Health
         Akinkugbe, et al.
         Cigarettes, E-                                                                       No relationship between self-reported EC use
                                                                                                                                                                                                               All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
         cigarettes, and          United    Cross-sectional study                             and self-reported dental problems, including
         Adolescents’ Oral        States    on                       Dental problems          among current eEC users (OR=1.11; 95% CI:
Harm     Health: Findings from              13,650 adolescents       (cavities, gum disease   0.79-1.55) or ever users (OR=1.12 95% CI: 0.90-     2C        Poor
         the Population                     aged 12 to 17 years      or dental stains)        1.38) compared with never cigarette or EC
         Assessment of                                                                        users.
         Tobacco and Health
         (PATH) Study.
Mental Health
                                                                                                                                                       28

                                                                                                                                                            medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
        Bandiera, et al.                 Cohort study of                                Correlation between depressive symptoms and
Harms   Depressive symptoms              5,445 college students Self-reported           self-reported EC use was significant at baseline
and     predict current e-      United   (18–29 year olds) with depressive symptoms     (β = .05; p< .01), however, EC use did not         2B        Good
Benefit cigarette use among     States   6-month and 1-year                             predict higher depressive symptoms at 6-
s       college students in              follow-ups                                     months or 1-year follow-up.
        Texas.
        Lechner, et al. Bi-
        directional                                                                     Self-reported EC use over previous 12-months
        associations of                  Cohort study of 347                            associated with greater rate of increase in
        electronic and          United   adolescents assessed                           depressive symptoms over time (b = 1.272, SE =
Neutral combustible cigarette   States   at baseline, 6- and 12- Self-reported          0.513, p = 0.01) compared with never EC use.       2B        Good
                                                                 depressive symptoms
                                                                                                                                                               (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
        use onset patterns               month follow-up                                Higher frequency of EC use was associated with
        with depressive                                                                 higher depressive symptoms at 12 months
        symptoms in                                                                     among sustained users (B = 1.611, p = 0.04).
        adolescents.
        Dahal, et al. Smoking                                                           Self-reported EC use (any quantity) who were
        Cessation and                                                                   never smokers had higher depressive
        Improvement in                                                                  symptoms (>10 on CES-D 10) compared with
        Mental Health                                                                   never EC users (OR=2.46; 95%CI: 1.82-3.33).
        Outcomes: Do People              Cross-sectional survey Self-reported           Former smokers who used ECs had higher
Benefit Who Quit Smoking by              on                                             depressive symptoms compared with never            2C        Poor
        Switching to                     52,956 participants    depressive symptoms     smokers (OR=4.19; 95%CI: 2.47-7.11). Former
                                Canada                                                  smokers who did not use EC had elevated risk
        Electronic Cigarettes                                                           of depressive symptoms as well (OR=1.41 (95%
        Experience                                                                      CI: 1.19 to 1.68) compared to never smokers.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
        Improvement in                                                                  EC use included any quantity including
        Mental Health?                                                                  experimental use.
        Chadi, et al.                                                                   Self-reported EC use associated with higher
        Depressive Symptoms              Cross-sectional survey Self-reported           odds of suicidal ideation in past 12 months
Harm and     Suicidality in
        Adolescents Using e-
                                United   of
                                         26,821 high school     depressive symptoms     (OR=1.23; 95%CI: 1.03-1.47) and depressive
                                                                                        symptoms (OR=1.37; 95%CI: 1.19-1.57)               2C        Poor
                                States                          and suicidal ideation
        Cigarettes and                   students                                       compared with never EC users, adjusted for
        Marijuana: A                                                                    current smoking (but former and current
                                                                                                                                                29

                                                                                                                                                              medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
       Secondary Data                                                                      smokers were not excluded). No use of
       Analysis From the                                                                   validated scores to obtain outcomes.
       Youth Risk Behavior
       Survey.
                                                                                           Self-reported EC use associated with mental
                                                                 Self-reported mental      health issues, including PHQ-9 score ≥10
                                                                 health issues on PHQ9     (Cramer’s V=.044; p=0.052), ADHD (Cramer’s
       Grant, et al. E-                                          scale, self-reported      V=.073; p<.001)) , PTSD (PC-PTSD score
       cigarette use (vaping)             Cross-sectional survey diagnosis of ADHD         ≥3;Cramer’s V=.064; p=<002), gambling
       is associated with       United    of                     (Y/N), PTSD (PC-PTSD      disorder (Cramer’s V=.081, p<.001) and anxiety
Harm   illicit drug use, mental States    3,572 college and      score), gambling          (GAD-7 > 10; Cramer’s V=.066; p<.001). They       2C        Fair
                                                                                                                                                                 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
       health problems, and               graduate school        disorder (Y/N), anxiety   were also more likely to report low self-esteem
       impulsivity in                     students               (GAD-7 score), trait      (Cramer’s V=0.63; p=.002), and endorse traits
       university students.                                      impulsivity plus          of impulsivity (attentional: cohen’s d=.421;
                                                                 compulsivity,             p<.001), but not compulsivity (cohen’s d=0.532;
                                                                 academic impairments      p=.043). Did not control for cigarette use.
                                                                                           Participation rate of 38% so sample bias
                                                                                           possible. No definition of EC use provided.
                                                                 Self-reported             Self-reported EC use associated with higher
                                                                 depression (higher        depression score (OR=1.04; 95% CI: 1.01-1.08)
       King, et al. Tobacco               Cross-sectional survey score, greater            compared with never EC use, controlling for 30-
       product use and           United   of                     depression), stress       day cigarette use. EC use was associated with
Harm   mental health status               2,370 college students (higher score, greater    higher stress score (OR=1.03 95% CI: 1.00-1.05)   2C        Fair
                                 States
       among young adults.                                       perceived stress),        compared with never EC use, controlling for 30-
                                                                 mental health             day cigarette use. Dual use but not former
                                                                                                                                                                                                          All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
                                                                 diagnosis                 smoking was accounted for.
                                                                 Self-reported             Among female non-smokers, self-reported EC
       Pham, et al. Electronic                                   depressive symptoms,      users had increased mood disorders (OR=1.9;
       cigarette use and                  Cross-sectional survey mood and anxiety,         95% CI: 1.2–3.0) and anxiety disorders (OR=1.9;
Harm   mental health: A                   of 53,050 participants mental health, suicidal   95% CI: 1.1-3.2) compared with non- EC users.     2C        Poor
       Canadian population-                                      thoughts, binge           Female current EC use was associated with
       based study.                                              drinking                  mood (OR=1.9 (95%CI: 1.4–2.6) and anxiety
                                                                                           (OR=2.6 (95% CI: 1.9–3.6)) disorders compared
                                                                                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                                                                medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                 Canada                                                   with non EC use. Among male non-smokers,
                                                                                          self-reported EC users had increased mood
                                                                                          disorders (OR=1.6; 95% CI: 1.0-2.7) compared
                                                                                          with non-EC users. Among male smokers, EC
                                                                                          use was not associated with mood disorders
                                                                                          (OR=1.4 (95%CI: 0.9–2.3). EC use was defined
                                                                                          as any quantity within the last 3 months,
                                                                                          including experimental use.
Other
                                                                                          Obese (BMI >25Kg/m2) participants had higher
                                                                                          likelihood of belonging to self-reported
                                                                                                                                                                   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
         Lanza, et al. Obesity                                                            Cigarette/EC / Tobacco class compared with the
                                           Cross-sectional survey                         High Substance Use (β =1.48, OR = 4.40, p <
         and cigarette                     (convenience sample) Self-reported BMI         .05) and Risky Alcohol Use (β =1.94, OR = 6.97,
Harm     smoking: Extending      United                                                                                                       2C        Poor
                                 States    of 452 participants                            p < .05) classes; higher likelihood of being
         the link to e-                                                                   classified into the cigarette/ electronic tobacco
         cigarette/vaping use.                                                            class compared to the low substance use class
                                                                                          not significant.
                                                                                          No detail of definitions for EC use.
        Miler, et al. Resolution           Case study of a never-                         After 8 months of vaping, the patient reported
        of recurrent tonsillitis           smoker who vapes,                              absence of exacerbations of tonsillitis, and
                                           with a history of
Benefit in a non-smoker who United
        became a vaper. A                  recurrent, chronic
                                                                  Exacerbations of
                                                                  tonsillitis
                                                                                          marked improvement in
                                                                                          Tonsillitis. The study did not mention any other     4         Fair
                                 Kingdom
        case study and new                 tonsillitis                                    comorbidities or exhaustively account for all
                                                                                                                                                                                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
        hypothesis.                                                                       confounders
        Maridet, et al. The                                                               The patient was diagnosed with nickel contact
        electronic cigarette:              Case study on a        Clinically-determined   dermatitis associated with the use of an
Harm the new source of           France    52-year old woman      erythematous, scaly     electronic cigarette. The articles also discussed    4        Good
        nickel contact allergy                                    dermatitis              the literature on nickel content in different
        of the 21st century?                                                              brands of ECs.
                                                                                                                                                   31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          APPENDIX 1
          SEARCH TERMS
          Search terms for ENDS included: Electronic cigarette; Electronic nicotine delivery system; E-cigarette;
          Vaping; Vapor; Reduced risk tobacco product; Non cigarette tobacco; Nicotine aerosol; E-cigarette
          aerosol.
          Search terms for health outcomes included: Health outcome; Morbidity; Mortality; Cancer;
          Cardiovascular disease; Chronic obstruct pulmonary disease; COPD; CVD; Acute myocardial
          infarction; Stroke; Cardiovascular; Cerebrovascular; Health effects; Adverse; effects; Respiratory.
                                                                                                                                32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
          APPENDIX 2
          Abbreviations      :
          BMI: Body mass index
          CAT: COPD Assessment Test
          CAD: Coronary artery disease
          COPD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
          CVD: Cardiovascular disease
          DBP: Diastolic blood pressure
          ENDS: Electronic nicotine delivery systems
          EC: Electronic cigarette
          HR: Heart rate
          MA: Meta-analysis
          MI: Myocardial infarction
          SBP: Systolic blood pressure
                                                                                                                                33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208355.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
