medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Individual-level response adaptive crossover trial design for epilepsy:
             structure and simulation
             Wesley T. Kerra,b*, Xingruo Zhanga and John M. Sterna
             a
               Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of
             California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; bDepartment of Internal
             Medicine, Eisenhower Health, Rancho Mirage, California, USA
             Wesley T. Kerr, M.D., Ph.D.
             710 Westwood Plaza
             Suite 1-240, Box 951769
             Los Angeles, California, 90095
             Email: WesleyTK@G.UCLA.edu
             Phone: (310) 825-6681
             Fax: (310) 206-4733
             ORCID Numbers: Wesley T. Kerr 0000-0002-5546-5951. John M. Stern 0000-0002-3549-
             1642. Twitter: @wesleytkerr
             Manuscript word count: 4,615
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Individual-level response adaptive crossover trial design for epilepsy:
             structure and simulation
                         Trials of antiseizure medications involve static group assignments for treatments
                         with pre-specified durations. We propose a response-adaptive crossover design
                         using basic statistical assumptions regarding both seizure count and duration of
                         treatment to determine when a participant can change group assignment. We
                         modelled seizure frequency as a Poisson process and estimated the likelihood that
                         seizure frequency had decreased by 50% compares to baseline using both a
                         Bayesian and maximum likelihood approach. We simulated trials to estimate the
                         influence of this design on statistical power and observation duration with each
                         treatment. For patients with 9 baseline seizures in 4 weeks who had no change in
                         seizure frequency, the simulation identified non-response in a median of 16 days.
                         The response-adaptive crossover design resulted in a modest increase in
                         statistical power to identify an effective treatment while maximizing the time in a
                         group producing a response. Only 8% of participants remained in the placebo
                         group for all 90 days of the simulated trials. These example theoretical results can
                         provide quantitative guidance regarding objective criteria to determine non-
                         response in real-time during a controlled clinical trial without revealing the
                         assigned treatment. Implementing a response-adaptive crossover design may both
                         improve statistical power while minimizing participant risk.
                         Keywords: epilepsy; clinical trial simulation; medication response; seizure
                         frequency; Poisson process
                  1. Introduction
             Clinical trials for treatments of epilepsy examine treatments that may reduce the
             frequency of epileptic seizures, ideally to zero. Effect sizes in these trials are limited by
             waiting to observe potentially infrequent seizures and uncertainty in the real-time
             criterion for response to treatment. Response to treatment is based on the flawed
             measure of participant-reported seizure frequency, as there is no objective biomarker for
             response 1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                         Worsening or non-response to treatment results in risks including the immediate
             physical injury during and after the seizure, loss of independence from driving,
             employment and other restrictions, and the social stigma of seizures. In fact, participants
             who were assigned to the placebo arm of clinical trials have been shown to have a 6.1
             times increased risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) 2. In addition,
             there are direct financial costs both to the participant and trial administration to continue
             participants whose assigned treatment is not producing a positive response. Therefore,
             there have been substantial discussions regarding how exposure to placebo or
             ineffective treatments can be minimized 3. Implementation of response-adaptive
             randomization may address many of those concerns 4; 5.
                         To illustrate this approach and advance the optimization of response-adaptive
             design, we propose a statistical criterion to define how long a participant receives a
             treatment based both upon the number of seizures that occurred and the length of time
             during which those seizures occurred. This builds upon the previously proposed time to
             the pre-randomization seizure count (PSC), which expects that this time would be
             lengthened by effective treatment 6. The exact statistical process that models seizure
             occurrences has not been determined (see discussion and 7; 8). For illustration, we
             simplify this emerging literature by modeling seizures as a Poisson process and defining
             non-response as less than a 50% reduction in seizure frequency, with a false positive
             rate (α) of 5%. After individual-level response is determined, the participant is switched
             to another treatment arm. If the participant has already been in all treatment arms,
             participation is either terminated or the re-assignment is to the treatment arm where they
             had the lowest seizure frequency for the remainder of the trial.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                  2. Materials and Methods
             The participant’s journey through this individual-level response adaptive cross-over
             randomization involves two steps (Figure 1). The first step is the real-time criterion to
             determine when a participant would be unlikely to respond to the assigned treatment.
             The second step is the process of response-adaptive crossover trial design to select
             subsequent treatments after response has been determined.
             2.1 Determination of Individual-Level Response
             This manuscript utilizes statistical theory to determine the minimum number of seizures
             reported by an individual participant at any point within a clinical trial that would make
             it unlikely that the participant’s SF has halved during the treatment period. While the
             structure of a clinical trial can vary, we specifically address trials with an initial 28-day
             baseline, or pre-randomization, monitoring period, followed by randomization into the
             assigned treatment for 90-days. The proportionality of Poisson processes allows our
             method generalizes to any length of baseline or treatment period.
                         The following will demonstrate the statistical basis by which we determine the
             probability that a patient has either failed or responded to an anti-seizure medication
             (ASM) based on real-time reporting of their seizures during a clinical trial. This is
             organized in the following sections:
            (2.1.1) Stating the problem based on statistical assumptions and distributions
            (2.1.2) Illustrating the framework of the solution using conventional hypothesis testing
            (2.1.3) Incorporating uncertainty of estimation into the solution using a Bayesian
                         approach
                      We first address the question of how to determine the likelihood that the patient
             has failed a medication. Subsequently, we address the probability of falsely identifying

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             a patient as a non-responder if the threshold of experiencing more than half the baseline
             seizures is used.
             2.1.1 Statistical Problem Statement and Assumptions
             First, we model the statistical process that generates seizure counts, , over a certain
             period of time, , as Poisson processes in which the following assumptions are made:
                         •    The probability of a seizure during a time interval is proportional to the
                              length of that time interval.
                         •    Two seizures cannot occur simultaneously.
                         •    The probability that a seizure occurs does not change over time within the
                              clinical trial unless a treatment change is made.
                         •    The probability that a seizure occurs during one-time interval is independent
                              of if a seizure occurs during any non-overlapping time interval.
                         While most of these principles are theoretically true for seizures, real-world
             studies have shown deviation from this theoretical ideal 9-11. We chose to use a Poisson
             process model because both the number of seizures and time in which these seizures
             occurred can be used to develop more efficient criteria for response. As we discuss
             below, this approximation of probability of individual-level response is only as good as
             the Poisson approximations hold true for each individual’s seizure pattern. In other
             words, this Poisson assumption may not be accurate, but it may be useful.
                         Others have suggested that a negative binomial distribution resulted as much as
             15% reduction in residual error when modeling seizure counts 7. While the negative
             binomial may model seizure count more closely, the difference between the Poisson and
             negative binomial does not influence the utility of our proposed trial design. We chose
             to use a Poisson to be able to make clear statements regarding the assumptions of the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             model and determine the shape of the Bayesian priors in 2.1.2 and derive the analytical
             formulae in 2.1.3.
                         Based on the properties of a Poisson process, we then determine that the
             probability that a patient has n seizures during time interval t is given by:
                                                                            
                                                          |  !              .
             In a clinical trial with a baseline period, we can find the maximum likelihood estimate
             of the baseline , denoted as  , for each patient with the following formula:
                                                                      
                                                                         .
                                                                       
             In a clinical trial where we are assessing if a patient responds to an antiseizure
             mediation (ASM), we define a response as a 50% reduction in seizure frequency. In our
             notation, that would be equivalent to halving  . Therefore, in the treatment phase, we
             evaluate, given our reported seizure count,  , the probability that  is less than or
             equal to half of  .
                         The threshold of response of halving of the SF is based on European Union
             convention for the reporting of trials in seizures 12. These thresholds can be modified
             based on the individual trial design. Reasonable choices could include 25% reduction,
             non-inferiority of the baseline, or less than doubling of the seizure frequency. The latter
             threshold, similarly, has been used as a criterion for exit in trials before 13-15.
             2.1.2 Framework of the Solution
             Therefore, for a given seizure count during the treatment period,  , we determine the
             probability that seizure count, or higher, would occur if the rate of seizures had at least
             halved. This corresponds to a null hypothesis that the seizure rate is                        ⁄2 and a
             one-tailed alternative hypothesis that                  ⁄2. We write the probabilistic expression

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             as:
                                                                  2 .
             If we take the worst case scenario that the seizure rate had just halved, we recognize this
             as the right sided cumulative distribution function of the Poisson distribution, which is
                                                                         బ
             the upper incomplete gamma function, Γ  ,                    . This logic is illustrated in the
             following expression:
                                                                                            
                                                         2   Γ  , 2 .
             Therefore, based on the reported seizure frequency during the baseline period, we can
             create a table of situations where this probability is less than 5%, suggesting that the
             null hypothesis that seizure frequency has been halved is violated with false positive
             rate, α, of 5% (Table 1).
                         As a point of discussion, if the actual new seizure rate,  , was less than half of
                ⁄2 then the actual seizure rate would be lower, but the number of seizures that needed
             to be observed prior to determining that the patient had not responded to the new
             treatment would not change. In this situation, the probability of enough seizures
             occurring to reject the null hypothesis would be lower than 5% but, because we observe
             seizures instead of  , we would have to consider the worst-case scenario that                       
                ⁄2.
                         Secondly, this same framework can be used to address how often patients with
             seizure frequencies less than half the baseline seizure frequency report seizure counts
             higher than half the baseline rate during the treatment period. This expression is as
             follows:
                                                                                   
                                                     2    2   Γ  2 ! , 2 .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Where " and & are the ceiling operators and the left side of the equation models                        
              ⁄2 instead of    .
                         These estimates focus on individual-level prediction instead of population-level
             prediction; therefore utilization of a population-level, mixed-effects model where some
             individuals are classified as responders and some are classified as nonresponders is not
             appropriate 7; 10; 16; 17. Mixed-effects models hypothesize that the population is a mix of
             non-responders with no change in seizure frequency plus responders with a common,
             group-level improvement in seizure frequency. Mixed-effects analysis reveals treatment
             assignments by comparing the distribution of placebo response to active-arm non-
             responders. Due to this focus on group-level response and unblinding, the individual-
             level likelihood that the participant is a responder is calculated after trial completion and
             is not determined in real-time during the trial.
             2.1.3 Incorporating statistical uncertainty
             One complication behind the simple solution described above is that we utilized the
             maximum likelihood estimate of  and  . Next, we consider the possibility that the
             actual estimated baseline seizure rate, ' , is different from this maximum likelihood
             estimate, and then repeat the process illustrated above. We incorporate this uncertainty
             by utilizing a weighted contribution of the possible options for  where the weights are
             based upon the probability of a particular '  given the observed number of seizures in
             the baseline period,  .
                         To estimate these probability-based weights, we use Bayes formula as below:
                                                                   ( 0   | '    +(   ' +
                                (   ' ) 0   +                  ∑   0   |                .
             We estimate the prior distribution of , (   '  +, using a uniform distribution across
             all possible values of  ranging from one seizure every 28 days to 24 seizures per day

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             for 28 days in a row in steps of one seizure every 28 days. The shape of this probability-
             based weighting for example values of  is illustrated in Figure 1.
                         We also can use this structure to estimate the likelihood of each seizure rate,  ,
             during the treatment phrase based on the reported seizures during the treatment phase,
              . In this way, we can assess the likelihood that 2                    using the following
             expression:
                   2     0     ∑ బ   | 0    ∑               ೟బ
                                                                                                      ೟|೟ ೟
                                                                                                      ∑‫׊‬ഊ  ೟|
                                                                                                                             .
                                                  
                         We include  in this expression because we are considering the number of
             seizures,  , that occur in a certain number of days during the treatment period, which
             may be less than 28 days.
                         For the prior distribution of  , we again use the uniform distribution across the
             same range as prior. If we had assumed that  was unchanged by treatment, this would
             bias our analysis towards concluding that the seizure rate during the treatment period,
                , was unchanged from the baseline period,  .
                         We can determine the minimum  for which this probability is less than 5% to
             determine the number of seizures needed to be observed in a specific treatment period
             to determine that the patient is unlikely to have responded to treatment. A table of these
             minimum seizure counts,  , is displayed in Table 2.
                         Secondly, to use this similar Bayesian framework for the question of falsely
             identifying pateints as non-responders when they report more than half as many seizures
             as they did during the baseline period. This corresponds to the following statistical
             expression:
                                                                                                   
                                      2    2   -   | 0    Γ 2 ! , 2 .
                                                                      బ

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             2.2 Simulated Trials
             To illustrate the practical impact of this approach, we simulated a Poisson process for
             10,000 participants with varying response to treatment from an 80% reduction in seizure
             frequency to a doubling of seizure frequency compared to the baseline seizure
             frequency. We chose 10,000 simulations based on the rule of thumb that 5% ordinal
             thresholds tend to be stable after 10,000 simulations. For clarity, our approach does not
             require that an individual trial have 10,000 participants. We illustrate these simulations
             for 4, 10, and 28 baseline seizures, chosen as low, median and high baseline rates based
             on previous recent trials 13-15. Using these simulations, we estimated the median and
             95% confidence interval upper tail of the duration of treatment needed to determine
             non-response. To examine the false-positive rate for identifying non-responders, we
             varied the mandatory observation period from 1 to 45 days and simulated 100,000
             participants who had a 50% reduction in seizure frequency.
             2.3 Response-adaptive crossover randomization
             After we have determined that the participant has not responded to their initial assigned
             treatment, we then determine which subsequent treatment to assign them to. In a two-
             arm trial, this would involve switching from active treatment to placebo or vice-versa.
                         In trials with multiple treatment arms, we can use other principles of response-
             adaptive randomization. Namely, due to the modeling above, we have an updating
             individual-level and therefore also population-level estimate of the likelihood each
             participant is responding to their assigned treatment. Based on current standards for
             clinical trials of seizures 12, we compared median percent reduction in seizure frequency
             of treatment relative to baseline. Due to potentially small sample size in some entries of
             the two-by-two contingency table of the median test, we used Fisher exact statistics as
             compared to Pearson’s chi-squared tests. While we could have weighted this

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             comparison by the certainty of difference using the formulae in section 2.1 or the
             duration on the assigned treatment, we opted to maximally match the statistical
             techniques applied in canonical trials. The motivation for the median is that the
             theoretical ratio of λt:λ0 - where λ is the parameter for a Poisson process - is not
             normally or t-distributed.
                         The subsequent treatment is probabilistically selected based on this population-
             level estimate of response. Specifically, the likelihood of selecting the potentially
             inferior treatment is proportional to the p-value of the population-level difference
             between the treatments. For example, in a trial with placebo and two doses of a single
             treatment, a participant who did not respond to the low dose active treatment could be
             randomized to placebo or high dose treatment, with a probability of 30% and 70%,
             respectively if the p-value of difference is 60%.
                         If the participant did not respond to this second treatment regimen, the
             participant would then be randomized to the last treatment protocol.
                         If a participant has not responded to any of the potential treatment protocols
             within the trial, there are two options: exit the trial or re-assignment to the treatment
             group that achieved the lowest seizure frequency for the duration of the trial’s
             observation period. This extended observation on the potentially most efficacious
             treatment allows for observation of long-term adverse effects on treatment.
                         As a trial progresses, there is increasing likelihood that the active treatment arms
             may be determined to be statistically superior to placebo with a false positive rate, α, of
             5%. In this case, the above response-adaptive randomization scheme would have a less
             than 5% likelihood of assigning a participant to placebo if there were multiple treatment
             arms that the participant had not experienced. However, some participants would still be
             assigned placebo if the participant had not entered that arm. Instead of ending a trial

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             early, an additional criterion could avoid this by eliminating the placebo option if pre-
             determined criteria are met. The remaining participants would receive one of the
             effective active treatments.
                         To illustrate this protocol through simulations, we consider 10,000 simulated
             trials with a placebo and two independent treatments, one of which causes a 25%
             reduction in seizure frequency and the other causes a 50% reduction in seizure
             frequency. To reduce the complexity of the simulation and have a simulation similar to
             the size of a typical RCT, we simulated 300 sequential participants per trial with
             baseline seizure frequency of 9 seizures per 28 days and use the BPP method for
             determination of individual-level non-response. We chose this seizure frequency as
             slightly higher than the median baseline seizure frequency in recent trials to benefit the
             utility of this design, but recruiting a participant population with this higher frequency is
                                     13-15
             still reasonable               . We did not use response-adaptive randomization to determine the
             initial treatment arm and we did not add an early termination criterion described in the
             paragraph above. We summarize these simulations by showing the empiric statistical
             power estimates and the length of time participants spent in each treatment arm using
             the BPP, the time to pre-randomization seizure count, and a canonical trial design.
                         While we simulate two independent treatments, we recognize that in most trials
             multiple treatment arms involve multiple doses of the same medication, leading to non-
             independent treatment arms. For example, if a participant was initially randomized to
             the high dose treatment and did not respond, it would be less likely that the participant
             would respond to the lower dose treatment. This level of complexity complicates the
             interpretation of our initial results; therefore, we deferred this consideration to future
             work.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                  3. Results
             3.1 Estimating individual-level non-response
             Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1 illustrate the minimum number of reported seizures
             during the treatment period that would be associated with a less than 5% chance that the
             participant’s SF had decreased by 50% using the BPP and MLE method of the baseline
             SF, respectively. The trial retention curves and statistics for 4, 10, and 28 baseline
             seizures in 28 days are illustrated in Figure 3 for BPP, Supplemental Figure 1 for MLE
             and both MLE and BPP are described in Supplemental Table 1. We found that requiring
             at least one week of observation substantially reduced false positive rates, and longer
             duration of mandatory observation reduced the rate of falsely identify participants as
             non-responders (Figure 4). The rate of falsely identified non-responders was
             independent of baseline seizure frequency. Refer to the online calculator linked below
             and supplemental text for more detailed information about other baseline seizure rates,
             durations of follow up and the minimum number of seizures to suggest no change or a
             doubling of seizure frequency.
                         The probabilities that participants had greater than 50% of their baseline seizures
             during the treatment period if their SF had reduced by 50% using both methods is
             illustrated in Supplemental Table 2.
             3.2 Response-adaptive crossover randomization simulations
             Compared to canonical trials, there were improvements in statistical power using both
             of the response-adaptative trial designs except when comparing placebo to the treatment
             that reduced SF only 25% (Figure 5). The cutoff of the number of enrolled participants
             to achieve 80% power to detect the actual difference between treatments with a false
             positive rate of 5% is displayed in Table 3. Variation in these cutoffs was estimated
             using bootstrapping and the width of 95% bootstrap intervals over 10,000 bootstraps

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             was only 3 participants, therefore these tight intervals are not displayed. In comparing
             the two response-adaptive trial designs, the BPP method resulted in substantially less
             time in less efficacious treatment arms with a corresponding increase in the time in the
             most effective treatment arm (Figure 6).
                  4. Discussion
             This manuscript illustrates a novel approach to design of a randomized controlled
             clinical trial to simultaneously maximize the statistical power of a trial while also
             maximizing the amount of time participants receive the most efficacious treatment.
                         Consider an illustrative example where a participant has a PSC of 7 (1 seizure
             per 4 days). The participant logs 2 seizures during the first treatment week, which is
             more than expected (1.75 seizures) but not high enough to determine a non-response
             (p=11% by MLE and 8% by BPP) or worsening of seizures (p=22% by MLE). If this
             participant has 2 seizures each during the second and third weeks, the total is 6 in 21
             days. At that time the probability that the participant’s seizure frequency has halved is
             4% for the MLE approach and 2.7% for the Bayesian approach. Using PSC, the
             participant would wait for 1 more seizure before re-randomization, but a canonical trial
             could continue this treatment for 69 additional days during which the patient would be
             expected to have 19 more seizures. To explore the Poisson approach using a variety of
             baseline and treatment seizure frequencies, please refer to our online calculator:
                         https://wesleykerr.shinyapps.io/PoissonSeizureFrequency/.
                         The simplified rule of thumb that this analysis suggested is that if the participant
             had greater than 75% of their baseline seizure frequency during any duration of
             treatment period greater than 1 week, the participant had less than a 5% chance of
             halving their baseline SF, as long as 5 to 10 seizures were observed.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                         Compared to a canonical trial, both the time to PSC and Poisson modeling
             resulted in modest reductions in the number of participants required to achieve 80%
             power (Table 3, 6). The marginal improvement in power in PSC was difference likely
             was due to more balanced sampling. Using PSC, participants spent less time on the
             most efficacious treatment, resulting in increased exploration of the less efficacious
             treatments (Figures 5 and 6, 18). Once a participant was assigned to the treatment that
             resulted in a 50% reduction in seizure frequency, the PSC criterion resulted in less than
             5% of patients completing 90 days, whereas the BPP criterion resulted in 87% 90-day
             completion. This difference highlights that both the seizure count and the amount of
             time needed to achieve that seizure count are important to determining non-response to
             treatment.
                         If the simultaneous goals of a clinical trial is to demonstrate efficacy of the
             treatment, maximize the safety of the participants through reduction in SUDEP and
             other risks from continued seizures, and monitor for treatment-related adverse effects
             primarily in the most efficacious treatment 3, then this approach may serve as a
             substantial improvement from standard practice. However, there are multiple practical
             limitations that we did not explore in this initial theoretical framework.
                         First, this approach supposes that participants log their seizures accurately every
             day and, if they were determined to not respond, have immediate access to the
             subsequent treatment assignment. While the accuracy of participant-reported seizure
             frequency is unpredictably variable 1, to switch treatments using a response-adaptive
             design, one would need to reveal the treatment assignment and perform real-time
             analysis of results. Double blinding then would necessitate automated processing of
             results and treatment assignments.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                         Secondly, a Poisson process approximates the statistical distribution of seizures,
             but there are many currently unmodeled sources of variation that limit the direct
             application of this model. Participants are more motivated to enroll in experimental
             treatments after their seizures have worsened, therefore artificially increasing their
             measured baseline seizure frequency, with subsequent regression towards their lower,
             long-term baseline seizure frequency irrespective of treatment 19. Further, placebo
             treatment does reduce seizure frequency, which would result in longer time in the
             placebo arm and reduced power to detect how treatment changes seizure frequency,
             controlling for placebo response 20; 21. Additionally, within a trial there are titration and
             pharmacokinetic effects of medications. Seizures that do or do not occur during titration
             offer valuable information but incorporating them into the model relies on knowledge of
             the dose-response curve and the central-nervous system effective dose at the time the
             seizure occurred based on the treatment’s half-life and steady state concentration 16.
                         Outside of clinical trials, long term monitoring through SeizureTrackerTM
             suggests that a 1-day back autoregressive negative binomial model may provide
             advantages over the simple Poisson model 7; 9. The choice of a 1-day back was based on
             the best fit across 682 adult and 844 pediatric participants 7. However, clinical
             experience suggests that some participants may have more propensity to cluster than
             others, and therefore may require further modeling to account for individual-level
             clustering. Longer-term seizure count modeling suggests that there may be weekly,
             monthly (especially in some menstruating female participants), and potentially annual
             trends that influence seizure frequency 8. Further, the responsive neurostimulator
             (RNS) data suggests that participants and caregivers can consistently under or over-
             count seizures in particular participants, which may be only partially controlled for by
             comparing to the individual-participant’s baseline seizure count 1. This long yet

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             incomplete list of unmodeled factors may be why negative binomial distributions better
             model real-world seizure diary data, because a negative binomial is similar to an
             overdispersed Poisson 7. Due to these considerations, our simple Poisson is a utilitarian
             framework that may be adapted by modeling non-Poisson sources of variation.
                         As with most statistics, observing more seizures (data) allowed for better
             estimation of the baseline and treatment SF and reduced misidentifications. The
             Bayesian approach is more conservative than the MLE approach is because it
             incorporates uncertainty in the baseline seizure frequency from observing a finite
             number of seizures. Individual-level modeling of non-Poisson contributions to variation
             in seizure count would likely require more pre-randomization and treatment monitoring.
                         With the understanding of these limitations in using a Poisson process, the
             general approach for earlier estimation of likelihood allows for reduction of the
             exposure time to an ineffective treatment and therefore benefits the participant’s safety
             while maintaining a similar power to the PSC approach, and offering improvements in
             power relative to the canonical approach. This statistical approach allows for a possible
             individual-level results in weeks instead of months. This analysis also suggests that the
             previous threshold of excluding subjects with a doubling SF may expose participants to
             unnecessary risk from requiring participants to experience additional seizures that did
             not impact the final conclusion of the trial.
                         Even though a short observation period can determine efficacy, trials also
             simultaneously evaluate for the presence of adverse effects to medications. While
             adverse effects tend to occur soon after dose initiation 22, shorter observation may
             reduce trials’ power for detection of longer-term side effects (e.g. weight gain) 6. The
             response-adaptive cross-over design allows for observation for adverse effects in
             treatment arms that are potentially effective, but limits observation in treatment arms

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             that are less effective. In our opinion, if a participant’s seizures were not responding a
             treatment, then prolongation of ineffective therapy to monitor for additional adverse
             treatment effects may be unethical. However, if a minimum of 8% of participants
             assigned to placebo continue to appear to respond to “treatment,” these participants may
             provide appropriate comparisons to participants on active treatment arms (Table 2).
             While the power to observe statistical differences in adverse events could be reduced,
             this reflects the population-level cost-benefit considerations that underlie the design of
             response-adaptive clinical trials 4; 5.
                         While the efficacy of treatment could be determined quickly, the parameters of
             the model that can be modified based on the cost-benefit ratio of the specific trial
             designers. Our practical simulations showed that the false positive rate for determining
             non-response was high within the first week and reduced asymptotically (Figure 3).
             When we required observation for at least 1 week, more than 80% of simulated
             participants with a 50% reduction in seizures completed a 90-day trial, irrespective of
             the baseline seizure rate. This retention fraction also can be increased by allowing for
             participants with less response to treatment to remain in that treatment arm (e.g. 25% SF
             reduction) or reducing the threshold for switching of a less than a 5% likelihood of
             response (e.g. to α<1%). In general, we caution against making treatment decisions
             based on observing a single seizure in participants who have infrequent seizures prior to
             three or more times the baseline inter-seizure interval 23; 24.
                         Consideration of both the number of seizures and the time in which these
             seizures occurred, relative to baseline, could result in modestly more efficient and
             markedly safer clinical trials for seizures. Compared to PSC, our approach shortened the
             duration of less effective treatments while lengthening the duration of more effective
             treatments, with only a small reduction in overall trial power.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                         Regarding placebo or treatments that do not change seizure frequency, the
             median patient with a PSC of 9 was on this ineffective treatment for 16 days using our
             method, 28 days using PSC, and 90 days in a canonical trial. These 12 to 74 additional
             days on ineffective treatment may harm the participant. Furthermore, the re-
             randomization may improve the trial’s ability to characterize effect treatments.
                  5. Acknowledgements
                         This work was supported by NIH R25 NS065723 and the Eisenhower Health
             Department of Internal Medicine.
                  6. Declaration of Interest Statement
             The authors have no competing interests to declare. We confirm that we have read the
             Journal’s position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is
             consistent with those guidelines.
                  7. References
             1. Fisher RS, Blum DE, DiVentura B, et al. Seizure diaries for clinical research and
                         practice: limitations and future prospects. Epilepsy Behav 2012;24:304-310.
             2. Ryvlin P, Cucherat M, Rheims S. Risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy in
                         patients given adjunctive antiepileptic treatment for refractory seizures: a meta-
                         analysis of placebo-controlled randomised trials. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:961-
                         968.
             3. Fureman BE, Friedman D, Baulac M, et al. Reducing placebo exposure in trials:
                         Considerations from the Research Roundtable in Epilepsy. Neurology
                         2017;89:1507-1515.
             4. Gupta S, Faughnan ME, Tomlinson GA, et al. A framework for applying unfamiliar
                         trial designs in studies of rare diseases. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:1085-1094.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             5. Biswas A, Bhattacharya R. Response-adaptive designs for continuous treatment
                         responses in phase III clinical trials: A review. Stat Methods Med Res
                         2016;25:81-100.
             6. French JA, Gil-Nagel A, Malerba S, et al. Time to prerandomization monthly seizure
                         count in perampanel trials: A novel epilepsy endpoint. Neurology 2015;84:2014-
                         2020.
             7. Tharayil JJ, Chiang S, Moss R, et al. A big data approach to the development of
                         mixed-effects models for seizure count data. Epilepsia 2017;58:835-844.
             8. Ferastraoaru V, Goldenholz DM, Chiang S, et al. Characteristics of large patient-
                         reported outcomes: Where can one million seizures get us? Epilepsia Open
                         2018;3:364-373.
             9. Ahn JE, Plan EL, Karlsson MO, et al. Modeling longitudinal daily seizure frequency
                         data from pregabalin add-on treatment. J Clin Pharmacol 2012;52:880-892.
             10. Cook RJ, Wei W. Conditional analysis of mixed Poisson processes with baseline
                         counts: implications for trial design and analysis. Biostatistics 2003;4:479-494.
             11. Chiang S, Vannucci M, Goldenholz DM, et al. Epilepsy as a dynamic disease: A
                         Bayesian model for differentiating seizure risk from natural variability.
                         Epilepsia Open 2018;3:236-246.
             12. Friedman D, French JA. Designing better trials for epilepsy medications: the
                         challenge of heterogeneity. Clin Invest 2013;3:927-934.
             13. Krauss GL, Bar M, Biton V, et al. Tolerability and safety of perampanel: two
                         randomized dose-escalation studies. Acta Neurol Scand 2012;125:8-15.
             14. Krauss GL, Serratosa JM, Villanueva V, et al. Randomized phase III study 306:
                         adjunctive perampanel for refractory partial-onset seizures. Neurology
                         2012;78:1408-1415.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             15. Toledo M, Whitesides J, Schiemann J, et al. Safety, tolerability, and seizure control
                         during long-term treatment with adjunctive brivaracetam for partial-onset
                         seizures. Epilepsia 2016;57:1139-1151.
             16. Jovanovic M, Sokic D, Grabnar I, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of topiramate
                         in adult patients with epilepsy using nonlinear mixed effects modelling. Eur J
                         Pharm Sci 2013;50:282-289.
             17. Snoeck E, Stockis A. Dose-response population analysis of levetiracetam add-on
                         treatment in refractory epileptic patients with partial onset seizures. Epilepsy Res
                         2007;73:284-291.
             18. Milhken G, Johnson D. Analysis of messy data. Volume 1: designed experiements.
                         Van Nostrand Reinhold: New York, New York. USA; 1984.
             19. Schmidt D, Beyenburg S, D'Souza J, et al. Clinical features associated with placebo
                         response in refractory focal epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 2013;27:393-398.
             20. Goldenholz DM, Goldenholz SR. Response to placebo in clinical epilepsy trials--
                         Old ideas and new insights. Epilepsy Res 2016;122:15-25.
             21. Romero J, Larimer P, Chang B, et al. Natural variability in seizure frequency:
                         Implications for trials and placebo. Epilepsy Res 2020;162:106306.
             22. Krauss G, Biton V, Harvey JH, et al. Influence of titration schedule and
                         maintenance dose on the tolerability of adjunctive eslicarbazepine acetate: An
                         integrated analysis of three randomized placebo-controlled trials. Epilepsy Res
                         2018;139:1-8.
             23. Westover MB, Cormier J, Bianchi MT, et al. Revising the "Rule of Three" for
                         inferring seizure freedom. Epilepsia 2012;53:368-376.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             24. Kwan P, Arzimanoglou A, Berg AT, et al. Definition of drug resistant epilepsy:
                         consensus proposal by the ad hoc Task Force of the ILAE Commission on
                         Therapeutic Strategies. Epilepsia 2010;51:1069-1077.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 1. Sparse Flow sheet of the proposed Response Adaptive Crossover Trial for
             three independent treatments: A, B and C. The dashed line indicates that each type of
             branch occurs for all other arms but is omitted for clarity. Step 1) Initial balanced
             randomization. Step 2) If the probability of response to initial treatment, P(Response) or
             P(Resp), is less than α (e.g. 5%), then response-adaptive randomization based on
             statistical comparison of other treatments. Step 3) If probability of response to second
             treatment is less than α, then assign to last treatment. Step 4) If probability of response
             to third treatment is less than α, then assign to the treatment with the lowest observed
             seizure frequency (SF) for that individual.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 2. The spread of the Bayesian posterior probability of the baseline seizure
             frequency, λ0, based on the number of seizures reported in a 28-day period, n0.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 3. The pattern of retention within a 90-day trial when 10,000 simulated
             participants exited the trial when their interim seizure frequency (SF) suggested non-
             response for participants with 4 (A), 9 (B), and 28 (C) seizures in a 28-day pre-
             treatment period using the Bayesian approach. The minimum duration of retention was
             set to 7 days. The disjointed nature of the curves in 2A and less so in 2B reflect
             transition of the cutoff from one integer to the next highest integer.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 4. Percent retention in the trial for 100,000 simulated participants who had a
             50% reduction in seizure frequency (SF) with treatment based upon the mandatory
             minimum observation period. The disjointed nature of the 4 seizures per 28 baseline
             days reflects the transition of the threshold for nonresponse at one day to the next
             highest integer.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 5: Statistical power based on sequential participant enrollment to detect
             differences between three treatments that result in 0% (placebo), 25% and 50%
             reduction in seizure frequency (Red SF) compared to a prerandomization baseline of 9
             seizures per 28 days using a canonical trial design, or response-adaptive crossover
             design using a time to PSC or BPP criterion for response.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
             Figure 6: Probability of retention in the treatment arm using a BPP criterion for exit
             compared to time to PSC for participants with 9 seizures per 28-day baseline.
             Analogous to Figure 3B. Discontinuity at 76 and 83 days reflect participants initially
             randomized to other treatments. Abbreviations: see Figure 5.

                                                                                                                                                medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                Baseline 28d  Minimum number of sz in X days to have not responded with α<0.05
                             Sz Count Sz Rate 1 2 3 4 5              6     7 14 21 28 30 60                 90
                                  100 3.6/d    4 7 9 12 14 16 19 34 50 64 69 132 194
                                   56 2/d      3 5 6 8 9 11 12 21 31 40 42 80 117
                                   28 1/d      2 3 4 5 6             6     7 12 17 22 24 44                 65
                                   14 1/2d     1 2 2 3 3             4     4      7 10 13 13 26             38
                                    9 1/3.1d   1 1 2 2 3             3     3      6    8 10 11 20           28
                                    4 1/w      1 1 1 1 2             2     2      3    5     6 6 12         17
                                                                                                                                                  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    2 1/2w     1 1 1 1 1             1     1      2    3     4 5       9    12
                                    1 1/4w     1 1 1 1 1             1     1      2    2     3 4       6     9
Table 1. The minimum number of seizures to be observed in a given number of days for the probability of 50% response to be less than 5% using
the Bayesian approach. Abbreviations: seizure (Sz), day (d), week (w).
                                                                                MLE                               BPP
               Baseline SF                         Change in SF: Half        No Change Double Half            No Change Double
                     4         Days Observed (Median; 95% UB) 90;90               27;90 7*;30 90;90                30;90 7*;37
                               Completed 90 days (%)               78                17  0.02    84                   37  0.03
                     9         Days Observed (Median; 95% UB) 90;90               16;78 7*;16 90;90                16;90 7*;16
                               Completed 90 days (%)               80                 4     0    87                   13     0
                                                                                                                                                                                      It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
                    28         Days Observed (Median; 95% UB) 90;90                8;27  7;7* 90;90                 8;31  7;7*
                               Completed 90 days (%)               80                 0     0    87                 0.05     0
Table 2. Characteristics of the duration of observation in 10,000 simulated participants with varying baseline seizure frequency (SF) and set
change in SF with treatment. The Asterix indicates the minimum allowed duration of observation of 7 days. Abbreviations: Maximum Likelihood
Estimate (MLE); Bayesian Posterior Probability (BPP); Upper Bound of the 95% empiric confidence interval (95% UB).

                                                                                                                                                 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210286.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
                                           Total participants for
                                                                             BPP    PSC Canonical
                                           1−β>80% for α<5%
                                           Placebo vs 25% SF reduction        28     30          37
                                           Placebo vs 50% SF reduction        17     12          22
Supplemental Table 1. Total participants required to achieve 80% power with each trail design based on 10,000 simulated trials. Abbreviations:
false positive rate (α), power (1−β), Prerandomization Seizure Count (PSC); Bayesian Posterior Probability (BPP).
                                                                                                                                                   (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                                                                                                                                                                       It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
