   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
An immunologically active, adipose-derived extracellular matrix biomaterial for soft
tissue reconstruction: concept to clinical trial
Amy E. Anderson1, Iwen Wu2, Alexis J. Parrillo2, David R. Maestas, Jr.2, Ian Graham2, Ada J. Tam3, Rachael
M. Payne4, Jeffrey Aston4, Carisa M. Cooney4, Patrick Byrne5, Damon S. Cooney4, Jennifer H. Elisseeff2*
1
  Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
2
  Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
3
  Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute of Cancer Immunotherapy, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
4
  Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
5
  Division of Facial Plastic Surgery, Department of Otolaryngology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
* Corresponding author: jhe@jhu.edu
SUMMARY: An adipose-derived injectable biomaterial provides volume correction for soft tissue defects
while promoting pro-healing immune responses.
                                                                            1
          NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
ABSTRACT
Soft tissue reconstruction remains an intractable clinical challenge as current surgical options and synthetic
implants may produce inadequate outcomes. Soft tissue deficits may be surgically reconstructed using
autologous adipose tissue, but these procedures can lead to donor site morbidity, require multiple trips to the
operating room, and have highly variable outcomes. To address the clinical need for soft tissue
reconstruction, we developed an “off-the-shelf” adipose matrix from allograft human adipose tissue
(acellular adipose tissue, AAT). We applied physical and chemical processing methods to remove lipids and
create an injectable matrix that mimicked the properties of fat grafting materials. Biological activity was
assessed using cell migration and stem cell adipogenesis assays. Characterization of the regenerative
immunology properties in a murine muscle injury model revealed allograft and xenograft AAT induced pro-
regenerative CD4+ T cells and macrophages with xenograft AAT attracting additional eosinophils secreting
interleukin 4 (Il4). In immunocompromised mice, AAT injections retained similar tissue volumes as human
fat grafts but did not have the cysts and calcifications that formed in the human fat graft implants.
Combination of AAT with human adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) resulted in lower implant volumes.
However, tissue remodeling and new adipose development increased significantly with the addition of cells.
Larger injected volumes of porcine-derived AAT demonstrated biocompatibility and greater volume
retention when applied allogeneicly in Yorkshire cross pigs. Under a biologic IND application, AAT was
implanted in healthy volunteers in abdominal tissue that was later removed (panniculectomy or
abdominoplasty). The AAT implants were well tolerated and biocompatible in all eight human subjects.
Analysis of implants removed between 1 and 18 weeks demonstrated increasing cellular infiltration and
immune populations, suggesting continued tissue remodeling and the potential for long term tissue
replacement.
                                                                          2

    medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
INTRODUCTION
Soft tissue damage can occur due to traumatic injury, congenital and acquired medical conditions, infection,
aging, or ablative surgical procedures such as tumor resection. Soft tissue defects can severely impact
cosmesis and lead to functional deficits due to lack of support, reduced range of motion and scar contracture
1
  . There are limited options currently available for soft tissue repair and reconstruction. Synthetic implants
can be used to treat some types of soft tissue defects such as those used for breast reconstruction following a
mastectomy. However, synthetic implants do not replicate many attributes of living tissue and can induce a
foreign body response. Furthermore, synthetic implants are not available for a broad range of defect sizes
and anatomical locations. Surgical approaches to treat soft tissue defects may utilize autologous tissue
harvested from the patient to provide a living implant for reconstruction as an alternative to synthetic
implants. Adipose tissue is frequently used as a source of autologous tissue due its elasticity and availability
around the body. Lipoaspirate may be collected using liposuction techniques and injected subcutaneously to
fill small tissue defects, while free flap adipose tissue transfers requiring additional microvascular
reconstruction are typically needed for larger volume corrections. While autologous tissue grafts provide a
biological soft tissue replacement, patients experience significant variability in transplanted tissue retention
in the defect site, typically losing between 40% and 60% of the original volume within 6 months. Poor
viability of transplanted adipose tissue can lead to necrosis, calcifications, and cyst formation 2-5. The
unpredictability of these procedures can result in costly secondary surgeries and are limited by the volume of
autologous tissue available in each patient, as well as co-morbidities related to tissue harvest and scarring at
the donor site 6. There is a significant need for a biomaterial solution that could provide the benefits of
autologous adipose tissue with the ease of use and delivery of synthetic implants.
Biological materials can be derived from the extracellular matrix (ECM) of tissues. Tissues are processed to
remove viable cells and a variety of physical, enzymatic, and chemical approaches are used to isolate and
                                                                           3

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
preserve the ECM in the form of sheets, particles, and gels 7. Biological scaffolds derived from both human
allograft and swine xenograft tissue sources have been used for a variety of clinical applications since 1995 8.
These materials are composed of a network of structural proteins and proteoglycans that provide both
mechanical support and biological cues for cell migration and tissue development. Biological cues from the
ECM including growth factors and ECM-associated vesicles promote cell migration and tissue development
with the implanted acellular scaffolds, gradually leading to the formation of new viable tissue with potential
permanence. While autologous adipose tissue is used frequently in surgical soft tissue reconstruction, there is
currently no FDA-approved biological material available that is derived from or mimics the properties of
native adipose tissue.
While mobilization and activity of stem cells are considered key requirements and central mechanisms for
new tissue formation in the body, recent research points to immune system engagement as a critical feature
of biological scaffolds for promoting regeneration. Badylak and colleagues found that biological scaffolds
derived from urinary bladder matrix tissue promoted a macrophage phenotype associated with tissue repair 9.
This preclinical finding was supported by a clinical study of muscle repair where a decellularized biomaterial
derived from small intestinal submucosa tissue resulted in a predominantly M2 (CD163+) macrophage
phenotype within treated muscle defects 10. Further studies found that biological scaffolds increased
recruitment of Type 2 helper T cells (TH2) and that these T cells were required for promoting the pro-
regenerative macrophage phenotype and tissue repair 11. These ECM-derived biomaterials induced
interleukin 4 (Il4) production, an immune-related cytokine, that is important for tissue repair in multiple
tissues including muscle, liver, cartilage, and brain 11-15.
Here we describe the development, preclinical characterization, and pilot clinical testing of an adipose ECM
biomaterial – Acellular Adipose Tissue (AAT). Previous studies characterized methods for generating AAT
and evaluated rheological properties compared to commercially available fillers 16,17. In the present work we
                                                                          4

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
assessed the biological activity of the translational AAT, including its ability to promote adipose stem cell
(ASC) migration and differentiation compared with a commercially available dermal tissue product.
Proteomic analysis further defined differences between AAT and other ECM products. In vivo preclinical
testing evaluated AAT biocompatibility and volume retention alone and in combination with human adipose
stem cells (ASCs) with comparison to the current clinical gold standard of autologous fat grafting in athymic
mice. We performed immunological characterization on both xenograft and allograft AAT in a murine
model. Safety in large animals was established for an allogeneic porcine-derived AAT in swine studies,
leading to the first-in-human, prospective Phase I trial.
RESULTS
Adipose tissue processing to create an injectable acellular extracellular matrix
To create a biological ECM scaffold material from adipose, we developed a method that included a
combination of physical and chemical tissue processing amenable to production using good manufacturing
practice (GMP) (Fig. 1A). The overall objective was to determine conditions that were mild enough to
preserve the ECM as much as possible while removing cells and lipids. Further processing was performed to
generate a physical structure and injection properties that were similar autologous fat grafting. Native
adipose tissue (Fig. 1B) contains lipid-laden adipocytes (Fig. 1C), blood vessels, and a collagenous
extracellular matrix (Fig. 1D). Briefly, cadaveric adipose tissue is disrupted using mechanical and chemical
methods to remove intracellular lipids and cells (Fig. 1E-F) and is then milled into an injectable form (Fig.
1G). The resulting processed AAT is composed primarily of structural proteins and extracellular matrix
components derived from adipose tissue along with intracellular proteins. The AAT ultrastructure resembles
an interwoven, thread-like matrix of collagen and ECM proteins (Fig. 1H-I).
                                                                          5

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Adipocytes are large and fragile cells and their disruption can lead to leakage of intracellular lipids. These
lipids have inflammatory properties that may negatively affect the host response 4,18 so processing conditions
were optimized to eliminate as much free lipid as possible. Triglycerides account for most of the lipid in
native adipose tissue, so glycerol content was used to approximate overall lipid content. Comparison of
glycerol levels in AAT and matched donor adipose tissue indicate that over 98% of the intracellular lipids are
removed during processing, leaving AAT with a glycerol content of less than 0.1% of its total weight (Fig.
1J).
Biochemical analysis determined that collagen was the primary component of AAT, 87.0% (± 5.1%) dry
weight (Fig. 1K). To assess the composition and tissue-specific properties of AAT in more detail, we
performed a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomic analysis. AAT and a
commercially available dermal ECM material, Acellular Dermis (ACD, Cymetra) were digested to obtain
peptides for identification by LC-MS/MS. The resulting peptide spectra were searched against a database of
the human proteome to identify the proteins of origin, and were classified based on matrisome proteins as
defined by Naba et al 19. Twenty-five matrisome or matrisome-associated proteins were identified, of which
11 proteins were common between the adipose and dermal matrices, 1 protein was unique to the dermis, and
13 were unique to adipose tissue (Fig. 1O).
Of the proteins shared between these two tissue products, members of the collagen family dominated the
spectra with Types I, III, VI as well as proteoglycans biglycan, decorin, lumican osteoglycin and prolargin.
AAT additionally contained one unique collagen (Type XIV) and two unique proteoglycans (aspirin and
heparin sulfate). There was differential expression of ECM glycoproteins and ECM-affiliated proteins
between the adipose and dermal ECM materials. Most ECM glycoproteins, including cartilage intermediate
layer protein, dermatopontin, fibrillin, and laminin, were found only in AAT, while periostin was the only
                                                                          6

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
unique glycoprotein to ACD. ECM-affiliated proteins identified in AAT included annexins A1, A2, and A6
and coagulation factor XIII, whereas no ECM-affiliated proteins were detected in ACD (Table S1).
AAT promotes adipose stem cell migration, adhesion, and adipogenesis in vitro
Tissue-derived materials provide more than a physical matrix for volume reconstruction as they contain
many biological factors that can impact surrounding cells and tissues. We evaluated the chemo-attractive
properties of AAT by measuring the migration of human adipose derived stem cells (ASCs) through a porous
membrane in response to soluble molecular signals. Serum-starved human ASCs were screened in a Boyden
chamber for 6 hours to determine whether they would migrate towards adipose ECM proteins. Serum-free
media was used as the negative control for cell migration and media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) was used as the positive control. A significant increase in the number of cells migrating across
the membrane was observed with the addition of 1% AAT to serum-free media in the lower chamber, or
51.8% of the migration observed with the positive control of 10% FBS (Fig. 1L).
In addition to attracting ASCs with soluble factors, AAT provides a physical substrate for cell attachment
and differentiation. ASCs seeded on AAT-coated slides preferentially adhered to the matrix proteins over
areas of exposed glass and adapted a spindle-shaped mesenchymal morphology (Fig. 1M). With the addition
of adipogenic induction media, cells underwent adipogenesis as determined by the adoption of a round
morphology characteristic of mature adipocytes and accumulation of lipid droplets that stained positively
with Nile Red (Fig. 1N).
To determine if the AAT scaffold provided a unique substrate for adipogenesis, we compared the adipogenic
differentiation potential of ASCs cultured in AAT and ACD in a 3D culture environment. ASCs were
suspended and cultured within AAT or ACD constructs formed in cylindrical plastic molds. Constructs were
initially maintained in growth media for 3 days after which they were transferred into adipo-inductive media
                                                                          7

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
until day 15. After 15 days, AAT and ACD constructs looked indistinguishable upon gross examination (Fig.
1Q). However, histological staining with Oil Red O revealed greater lipid accumulation in the AAT
construct compared to ACD (Fig. 1R). Furthermore, gene expression of early (PPAR and CEPB) and late
(FABP4, LPL, LEP) markers of adipogenesis in ASCs significantly increased in the AAT compared to ACD
(Fig. 1S).
AAT enhances new adipose formation in combination with ASCs without viability loss observed
within fat grafts
Autologous surgical methods for soft tissue reconstruction use lipoaspirate and ASCs enriched from
lipoaspirate. To compare AAT to these clinical techniques, we evaluated biocompatibility and volume
retention of human lipoaspirate and cells in an immune-deficient mouse model. Athymic nude mice each
received subcutaneous injections of AAT with and without ASCs. For implants containing ASCs, cells were
resuspended in AAT immediately prior to injection (Fig. 2A). No volume loss was observed in AAT without
ASCs over 12 weeks (final average volume ratio of 1.08), while inclusion of ASCs in the biomaterial
resulted in gradual loss of volume over the study period (final volume ratio of 0.63). Hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining of AAT showed extensive de novo adipose tissue formation and collagen remodeling where
ASCs had been delivered with the biomaterial (Fig. 2C). In these implants, much of the AAT was replaced
by new adipose tissue. The implant edges appeared completely populated by adipocytes while the center of
the AAT had less adipogenesis and regions where the implant was still visible suggesting progressive inward
cell migration and differentiation.
We also compared AAT with lipoaspirate (also known as fat grafting) as the gold standard treatment for soft
tissue volume correction (Fig. 2B). AAT and fat grafts were placed on the same mice (at distal sites) and
exhibited similar loss of volume (final volume ratios of 0.59 and 0.53 for AAT and fat grafting,
respectively). AAT implants lost volume faster in this study where the athymic mice also received fat grafts.
                                                                          8

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
AAT implants in fat-grafted animals also demonstrated increased cellular infiltration compared to AAT
implanted in animals that only received the biomaterial injections (fig. S1).
While the AAT and fat grafts exhibited similar volume retention, gross and histological examination of the
explanted AAT, AAT with ASCs, and fat grafts at 12 weeks revealed significant differences in cellular
reactions at the implant site. Each type of recovered implant had a distinct gross morphology. Fat grafts
retained the distinct yellow color characteristic of the intracellular lipids found in native human adipose
tissue (Fig. 2A). AAT implants without ASCs retained the white color of the AAT material, while AAT with
ASCs took on the color and texture of the surrounding tissues (Fig. 2B). The edge and center of AAT
implants were well-infiltrated with host cells, with clusters of adipocytes present near the implant edges and
small caliber blood vessels present both peripherally and in the center of implants (Fig. 2D). In contrast, the
fat grafts had only a layer of viable adipocytes on the outside layer of the implants with large necrotic cysts
towards the center of the implant. Regions of calcification surrounded by phagocytes were also observed,
which typically occurs secondary to tissue necrosis (Fig. 2E).
AAT induces pro-regenerative T cell and macrophage phenotypes
ECM-based biomaterials recruit immune cells and promote pro-regenerative phenotypes in macrophages and
T cells. These pro-regenerative immune phenotypes are central to the biomaterial efficacy in tissue repair.
Specifically, biological scaffolds induce a pro-regenerative (M2) macrophage phenotype and a CD4+ T
helper (TH)2 phenotype characterized by production of Il4. Previous in vivo testing of AAT evaluated
compatibility and efficacy of volume retention in the xenogeneic context of athymic mice and rats 16,20,
however AAT in clinical use would constitute an allogeneic biomaterial. Since both allograft and xenograft
ECM-based materials are used clinically today and both forms of AAT were assessed for volume retention
and compatibility, we sought to compare their immune-modulating properties.
                                                                          9

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
AAT derived from human tissue (hAAT, xenogeneic in mice) and outbred CD-1 mice (mAAT, allogeneic in
mouse) were implanted in quadriceps muscle defects in Il4/GFP-enhanced transcript (4get) mice. Animals
with normal (uninjured) quadriceps and injured animals treated with only saline solution served as control
groups. At 7 days post-treatment, the AAT was visible in the defects and the quadriceps and associated
scaffold were harvested to assess the immune responses using flow cytometry (Fig. 3A, B). Lymphoid and
myeloid populations were quantified relative to total live cells, CD45+ immune cells, or total CD3+ T cells
(Fig. 3C). As expected, implantation of a biomaterial significantly increased immune cell recruitment. Injury
alone (saline-treated vehicle wounds) increased CD45+ immune cell numbers approximately 10-fold
compared to healthy, uninjured muscle (40.2% vs. 3.9% of live cells). Treatment with allogeneic mAAT or
xenogeneic hAAT increased immune infiltration by 1.7-fold to 2.0-fold compared to vehicle treatment alone
(68.6% and 78.5% of live cells respectively). The xenogeneic hAAT recruited more than double the
proportion of eosinophils (23.9% of immune cells) compared to allogeneic mAAT (10.5%), saline treatment
(7.9%), or healthy muscle (8.4%). Abundance of total T cells was similar between healthy muscle and
scaffold-treated injured muscles (~5-6%), and while not statistically significant, untreated wounds had
roughly half the proportion of T cells (3.2%). T cells found within both allogeneic mAAT and xenogeneic
hAAT similarly skewed towards CD4+ T cells and away from CD8+ T cells relative to saline-treated wounds
and healthy muscle (Fig. 3D). Untreated muscle wounds had a larger proportion of macrophages (40% of
total immune cells vs. 6.7% in healthy muscle), while both allogeneic mAAT and hAAT contained
significantly smaller proportions of macrophages compared with vehicle treatment (18.9% and 21.0%
respectively).
Il4 expression at the wound site was traced to two immune populations: eosinophils and CD4+ T cells. While
hAAT-treated wounds contained more eosinophils than any other treatment group, the percentage of
eosinophils producing Il4 was similar across all conditions (~14-22% of total eosinophils were Il4/GFP+).
                                                                         10

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Il4 GFP median fluorescence intensity (MFI) increased slightly for hAAT-derived eosinophils, but the
populations are otherwise consistent in Il4 expression (Fig. 3E). CD4+ T cells recruited to scaffold-treated
wounds also contributed to Il4 production at the wound, though likely to a lesser extent than eosinophils.
Healthy muscle and untreated wounds contained undetectable or very low levels of Il4-expressing CD4+ T
cells (0% and 0.16% of CD4+ T cells respectively). While CD4+ T cells in allogeneic mAAT-treated wounds
had 10-fold higher Il4 expression than in saline-treated wounds (1.56% vs. 0.16% of CD4+ T cells), only
hAAT had significant differences Il4 for this population (64.4-fold increase over saline, 10.0% of CD4+ T
cells). MFI in the Il4+ CD4+ T cells was consistent between treatment groups (Fig. 3F). These findings
indicate that Il4 signaling in the wound site may be enhanced by either human adipose-derived AAT
specifically and/or due to its use in a xenogeneic context in this host species.
Xenogeneic AAT induced greater eosinophil infiltration and M2 polarization compared to allogeneic
AAT
We further investigated macrophage polarization with AAT treatment using the same wound model in
C57BL/6 mice. We also explored whether scaffold-associated immune responses were specific to the AAT
species of origin (species-matched versus species-mismatched) and evaluated an additional xenogeneic
porcine adipose-derived AAT (pAAT) along with syngeneic C57BL/6 mouse adipose-derived AAT. Immune
response to the syngeneic, allogeneic, and xenogeneic biomaterials in the wound site were assessed at 1-
week post-treatment similarly to the 4get studies.
Scaffold-associated macrophages in the murine muscle wounds expressed markers of M1 and M2
polarization (Fig. 4A). Uninjured murine muscle tissue contained predominantly double positive
(CD206+CD86+) macrophages but was also enriched 3.78-fold for M2 macrophages (CD206+CD86-) over
M1 macrophages (CD206-CD86+). Following muscle tissue injury, macrophage phenotype shifted
significantly towards a pro-inflammatory M1 polarization (M2:M1 ratio of 0.83) without affecting
                                                                         11

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
proportions of non-polarized or M2 polarized macrophages. All AAT materials promoted CD206 expression
and suppressed CD86 expression on macrophages. This effect was more pronounced in both xenogeneic pig
and human AATs (M2:M1 ratios of 14.3 and 11.9 respectively) compared to either the syngeneic or
allogeneic mouse-derived AATs (M2:M1 ratios of 2.5-fold and 2.1-fold) (Fig. 4B). Expression of genes
associated with a type 2 immune response (Il4 and Arg1) increased with biomaterial treatment, though the
response was significantly higher for pAAT and hAAT. Syngeneic or allogeneic AATs did not increase
IFNg or iNos expression within the wounded tissues, whereas pAAT and hAAT treatments elevated
expression of these type 1 genes (Fig. 4C).
Overall, syngeneic and allogeneic materials behaved similarly with respect to macrophage polarization as
well as recruitment of other immune cell types, and there were also no significant differences between the
two xenogeneic materials in mouse models of wound healing. Both xenogeneic AATs recruited significantly
more eosinophils than either syngeneic or allogeneic mAAT in mouse wounds (fig. S2), which likely
accounts for the elevated Il4 expression in these treatment groups and suggests that these responses are not
specific to the biomaterial species of origin, but rather to how the tissue product is used. Although
xenogeneic applications of AAT enhanced the magnitude of pro-regenerative immune responses, treatment
with any type of AAT resulted in a significant skewing of wound-associated macrophage away from an M1-
phenotype towards M2-phenotype, regardless of tissue context.
Large injection volumes of allogeneic adipose ECM are safe and persistent in swine
Clinical soft tissue deficits can be large, requiring significant volumes to restore structure. Larger volumes of
AAT were tested in Yorkshire cross pigs using cadaveric porcine adipose tissue (pAAT). Individual pigs (n
= 3) each received a total volume of 48 ml of pAAT injected subcutaneously at a variety of anatomical sites
with individual injection volumes up to 20 ml (Table S2). Implants were harvested after 4 weeks. Local
responses to the allogeneic pAAT were assessed both visually and histologically. No additional swelling
                                                                         12

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
beyond than the original injection volume or signs of skin irritation at the injection sites were observed, and
most implants were still clearly visible by external examination at the end of the study (Fig. 5A). A dose
escalation of injection volume resulted in increased implant volumes with larger injection volumes typically
translating to higher overall volume retention, although with increased variability (Fig. 5B). Volume
retention also depended on the anatomical location of the implant (fig. S3). Greater resorption of implants
appeared most common at sites with large amounts of native adipose or near joints where tissue compression
may have occurred.
Histologic sections for each implant were also semi-quantitatively scored by a pathologist. Implants
consisted of nonviable, acellular fibrous connective tissue matrix, few adipocytes, and a minimal to moderate
immune response composed of polymorphonuclear cells (including eosinophils), lymphocytes, plasma cells,
macrophages, and foreign body-type multinucleated giant cells, all predominantly at the periphery of the
acellular matrix. Fibroplasia along the edge of implants was often characterized by loosely arranged
fibroblasts, small caliber blood vessels, and few inflammatory cells (Fig. 5C). Cellular and tissue response to
the implant was generally minimal to mild, and within the implant the response was generally minimal to
moderate. There was some variation in the scores for implant sites from individual animals, as would be
expected, but there were no substantial differences among different animals for similar implants (Table S3-
S5). Larger implants generally contained more cells around the edges, while smaller implants had greater
penetration of cells into the center of the implants (Fig. 5D).
Phase I clinical study demonstrates safety and tolerability of AAT in healthy volunteers
A first-in-human, prospective Phase I trial was conducted in healthy volunteers undergoing elective tissue-
removal procedures under IRB approval. The FDA designated AAT as a biologic therapy so all clinical work
was performed under an Investigational New Drug application. The primary objective of this study was to
assess the safety of small volume AAT injections placed in redundant tissues that would be removed
                                                                         13

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
surgically at increasing post-injection time points. Secondary objectives included assessments of the cellular
responses within AAT implants using histological methods and the tolerability of AAT injections as reported
in patient and physical satisfaction surveys. Eight subjects were enrolled in the study and received
subcutaneous injection(s) of AAT in the abdomen; all implants were later excised during a panniculectomy
or abdominoplasty procedure after 1 to 18-weeks in situ (Table 1).
AAT demonstrated satisfactory safety results in Phase I testing with healthy volunteers (n = 8). None of the
subjects experienced severe adverse events (SAEs) or unanticipated adverse events (AEs) related to the study
intervention or exited the study due to an AE. Laboratory results, physical examinations, and vital signs were
unremarkable throughout the study. All anticipated AEs were noted as mild and included pain/tenderness
(n=2), erythema (n=4), bruising (n=4), hyperpigmentation (n=1), and textural change (n=3) at the injection
site(s). Most anticipated AEs occurred during the first two weeks after injection and were resolved prior to
excision (fig. S4). Other AEs commonly associated with injections were not observed in any participant
throughout the study (no scarring, ulceration, scabbing, purpura, oozing, crusting, blanching, blistering,
edema or abrasions). Volume of AAT injected did not correlate with incidence or severity of injection site
reactions, suggesting that the exposures tested were within safe ranges for these individuals (Table S6).
Secondary outcomes of tolerability and biocompatibility were assessed globally by panel reactive antibody
(PRA) testing and locally by histopathology. For 7 of 8 subjects, circulating antibodies against HLA (Human
Leukocyte Antigen) proteins did not increase by either 4- or 12-weeks post-injection. One subject had a sub-
clinical increase in anti-HLA antibodies at 12 weeks post-injection (11 weeks post-excision). This change is
likely not related to the study intervention, as it occurred several months after removal of the implant.
Therefore, we conclude none of the subjects had a systemic immunologic response which produced anti-
HLA antibodies against AAT (Table S7).
                                                                         14

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Cellular and tissue responses near and within the implant were generally mild, typically including infiltrate
of immune cells with some collagen remodeling at the implant periphery. Though accurate volume
measurements could not be taken on the skin surface with calipers during this study, histological analyses
reveal that significant implant volume was retained in all participants. None of the implants showed
indications of encapsulation, cyst formation, or tissue necrosis (Fig. 6A). Overall, histological and PRA
assessments revealed minimal inflammatory responses in all subjects.
AAT promotes local immune infiltration of CD4+ and FoxP3+ T cells and M1/M2 polarized
macrophages in humans
Cellular migration from the host tissue into the implant was apparent at the host-implant boundary and
increased with duration of implantation (Fig. 6A). After 18 weeks in situ, there were more cells present at the
implant periphery and implant center compared to earlier time points. Multispectral immunohistochemistry
also revealed the formation of new blood vessels at the edge of the implant (CD31+ vascular endothelial
cells) and infiltration of perivascular/adipose stem cells (CD34+) both around and within the implant at 18
weeks post-injection (Fig. 6B). By this latest excision time point, CD4+ T cells dominated within the
scaffold-recruited T cell population (Fig. 6C). Though both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were found dispersed
individually throughout the implant, they also often formed clusters with other non-T immune cells which
resembled small tertiary lymphoid structures (fig. S5).
Flow cytometry was performed on tissue samples from six study participants with excision time points
between 1 and 6 weeks. Immune populations present inside and around the AAT implants were quantified
relative to multiple subject-matched normal adjacent adipose samples also collected at the time of implant
excision (Fig. 6D-I). CD45+ immune cells (as a percentage of the total live cells) varied by subject but were
generally enriched within the AAT material compared to local fat (Fig. 6D). Within the CD45+ immune
compartment, granulocytes (CD45+CD11b+CD15+) were typically less abundant within AAT implants
                                                                         15

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
relative to normal fat, while macrophages and T cells were significantly enriched in AAT (Fig. 6E). FoxP3+
T cells increased within implants, representing recruitment of regulatory T cells (a subset of CD4+ T cells) to
the AAT scaffold. Cytokine production in scaffold-associated T cells was lower than in T cells isolated from
local adipose tissue, though this difference was only statistically significant across subjects for IFNγ. There
was no significant difference in IL4 or IL17α production between T cells isolated from AAT versus matched
adipose (Fig. 6F).
Polarization of scaffold-associated versus adipose-associated macrophages were assessed by CD80 and
CD163 expression, markers representing classically activated (M1) and alternately activated (M2)
macrophages respectively. Macrophages were identified globally by surface expression of phenotypic
markers (CD45+CD15-CD11b+CD11c+CD14+MHCII+). In the six subjects tested, macrophages present in
both AAT and control fat were primarily alternately activated M2 macrophages (CD163+CD80-).
Recruitment within the AAT implant enhanced the M2 phenotype of scaffold-associated macrophages over
fat-associated macrophages in most cases, particularly at early time points. Increases in CD80 expression
were primarily found in the double-positive macrophage population (CD163+CD80+), which begins to
expand at approximately 2 weeks post-injection and increases thereafter over the 6 weeks studied. AAT
implants in subjects with later excision time points had larger fractions of double-positive macrophages than
those with earlier excisions; similarly, early excision time points were associated with a larger proportion of
unpolarized macrophages (Fig. 6G).
Overall, the AAT microenvironment skewed scaffold-associated macrophages towards a CD163+CD80+
double positive phenotype in AAT compared to native adipose while maintaining similar proportions of M2
and M1 macrophages (Fig. 6H). Scaffold associated macrophages in the AAT implants had increased
expression of CD163 and CD80 (median fluorescence intensity, MFI) relative to control adipose, as well as
increased expression of myeloid markers CD11b and CD14 (Fig. 6I).
                                                                         16

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Absolute immune cell counts within implants versus surrounding native adipose tissue were also compared
for four subjects with excision time points between 1- and 6-weeks post-injection, revealing similar trends.
Numbers of CD45+ immune cells and T cells per gram of tissue were similar between AAT and adipose
tissue for all subjects. Granulocytes were consistently less abundant within AAT up to 6 weeks in situ than in
adipose tissue, while a significant influx of macrophages occurred within the implants after 1 and 2 weeks. In
these implants excised at 1 and 2 weeks (Subjects 06 and 04 respectively), the absolute number of M2
macrophages were 9.6-fold and 4.3-fold higher than in control fat. Double-polarized macrophages were even
more significantly enriched within AAT at 1 and 2 weeks (565-fold and 91-fold respectively). At 4 weeks
and 6 weeks, macrophage numbers were similar between AAT and local adipose tissue. Subjects also had
increased absolute numbers and relative proportions of M1 (CD80+CD163-) macrophages at their injected
sites; yet, M1 macrophages were by far the least abundant macrophage phenotype in all AAT implants tested
(fig. S6).
DISCUSSION
Adipose has been the tissue of choice for plastic and reconstructive surgeons for contouring and rebuilding
soft tissue deficits. These defects can occur after oncologic resections, traumatic injuries, and as a result of
congenital deformities. Autologous fat is often found in surplus and can be moved around the body in
various forms such as lipoaspirate or as larger tissue grafts or adipose flap transfers. Autologous fat grafting
has been used for a wide variety of clinical applications including breast reconstruction, cosmetic
enhancements, and even applications in neurosurgery. Larger flap transfers (including adipose) are used for
breast and extremity reconstruction and require microvascular reconstitution techniques. Because of the
variability between individual patients in tissue quality, anatomical locations and sizes of adipose depots, as
                                                                         17

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
well as inconsistency in tissue handling or surgical methods, there can be significant uncertainty in clinical
outcomes. Furthermore, the need for surgical harvesting of autologous adipose introduces donor site
morbidity and challenges of inadequate tissue available for reconstruction. Insufficient donor tissue is
particularly relevant, as the variability in retention often results in return trips to the operating room to
harvest additional fat for grafting. Donor site morbidities may cause significant further harm to the patient 21
and complications include infection, necrosis, thrombosis, hematoma, and flap loss 22,23.
While many ECM-based products are clinically available, AAT is the first biologic therapy specifically
designed to recapitulate the properties of fat grafting. A dehydrated form of adipose ECM has recently been
tested in human subjects, but this product is not terminally sterilized and is not being regulated by the FDA
as a biologic 24. Our processing methods preserve unique properties of adipose tissue including proteomic
composition and rheological properties 17 while removing lipids that can promote inflammation. The volume
maintenance of AAT appears to at least match fat grafting or stem cell delivery options, but the quality of
tissue formed within AAT was significantly different than for strategies incorporating live adipocytes,
particularly that calcifications and necrosis were never observed within AAT. The AAT implants in the large
animal study also followed trends that are observed clinically with fat grafting 18. Escalating volumes of
AAT were implanted safely in various anatomic locations in a swine model. Volume maintenance depended
on anatomical location and larger AAT implants demonstrated greater volume retention compared to smaller
implants.
Biological scaffolds derived from the extracellular matrix of different tissues are used for a variety of clinical
applications. This includes products derived from dermis, small intestine submucosa, bone, and urinary
bladder matrix that are approved for a variety of indications including hernia reinforcement, rotator cuff
repair and wound healing. These materials are complex and defining the mechanism of action remains a
challenge. The biological activity of the AAT presented here and that of other scaffolds studied is likely a
                                                                         18

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
combination of physical and biological cues. The proteomic analysis of AAT reveals some of its structural
complexity. ECM materials also contain many cell remnants and embedded intracellular proteins that may
contribute to immunological and other biological activities 25. Apoptotic cells are sensitive to damage signals
and play an important role in immunological responses and tissue repair 26. Huleihel et al. discovered that
extracellular vesicles containing biological factors are present within biological scaffolds and were also
found in all scaffold-derived clinical products tested 27. Metabolic factors may also contribute to the immune
phenotypes that develop in response to ECM scaffolds. Ultimately, the biological activity of ECM-based
materials is well documented and likely an important factor in clinical performance. Thus, measures of
activity such as cell migration or other cell function are needed to adequately predict performance of these
materials.
The immune system plays a key role in the response to tissue injury and biomaterial implantation. Both
innate and adaptive immune cells respond to implants and injury, and their phenotype can determine
downstream repair and biocompatibility outcomes. Previous preclinical studies showed that a pro-
regenerative macrophage phenotype is required for repair using biological ECM scaffolds, and that a local
TH2 response is required for promoting the pro-regenerative macrophage phenotype that develops in
response to biological scaffolds 11. This type 2 mediated response contrasts the macrophage and T cell
phenotypes that develop around synthetic implants which includes inflammatory macrophages fusing to form
foreign body giant cells and the more recently defined TH17 T cell and senescent cell phenotypes 28. The pro-
regenerative or “M2” macrophage response to biological scaffolds was validated clinically in biopsies from
large muscle defects treated with small intestinal submucosa-derived ECM 29. In the pilot clinical testing of
AAT presented here, we demonstrated for the first time the infiltration of CD4+ T cells into the implants as
observed in murine studies. At early time points, the macrophage changes associated with the pro-
                                                                         19

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
regenerative phenotypic response to biological scaffolds was observed. The latest time point studied, 18
weeks, demonstrated significant cellular migration evenly distributed throughout the implant.
Future studies will determine the capacity of AAT to treat larger, clinically relevant soft tissue defects. Further
understanding of the immune and stromal cell changes occurring in these ECM scaffolds and related systemic
changes is needed, particularly in a clinical setting that may differ significantly from preclinical models.
Finally, comparison of the tissue response to xenogeneic and allogeneic ECM scaffolds in people is needed to
better understand how these materials perform and to inform future technology design. While ECM scaffolds
have been used clinically for years, there is still minimal understanding of their mechanisms of action and
immunological effects in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
AAT was produced by decellularizing adipose tissue using a combination of mechanical and chemical
processing steps, and the material was characterized to determine physical and biochemical properties. In
vitro studies evaluated adipogenesis and migration of cells in response to AAT, while in vivo
biocompatibility, volume retention, and local immune cell populations infiltrating subcutaneously injected
AAT were assessed in small and large animal models. A first-in-human study determined safety and
tolerability in healthy volunteers, including histocompatibility and immune-modulation at the injection site.
Primary safety outcomes were evaluated in eight healthy volunteers, including adverse events (AEs), serious
adverse events (SAEs) and other significant AEs, physical examination results, laboratory abnormalities, and
vital signs. Biocompatibility and tolerability were assessed locally by histopathology and peripherally by
panel reactive antibody (PRA) testing for circulating anti-HLA antibodies. Local infiltrating immune cells
                                                                         20

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
were profiling by flow cytometry in human subjects, as well as in murine studies of scaffold treated VML
injuries. Materials were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise noted.
Biomaterial Characterization
Adipose extracellular matrix preparation
For preclinical studies, subcutaneous adipose tissue was obtained from patients undergoing abdominoplasty
procedures with approval from the Johns Hopkins University Institutional Review Board (IRB). Tissue was
subjected to mechanical processing and extensive rinsing, followed by incubation with 3% peracetic acid for
3 hours. Samples were brought back to physiological pH using DPBS (Gibco) and incubated overnight with
1% Triton X-100 in 2 mM EDTA, followed by additional rinsing. Decellularized matrix was then snap
frozen and finely cut using at Retsch GM300 knife mill. Moisture content was adjusted to 91% w/v with
DPBS using an Ohas MB45 moisture analyzer. Clinical-grade AAT was manufactured from cadaveric
adipose tissue under GMP conditions and terminally sterilized by gamma irradiation. Donor tissue for
clinical studies was screened and acquired from a tissue bank (Donor Network West, San Ramon, CA).
Scanning electron microscopy
Samples were prepared for SEM as previously described 16 by fixing in 3.0% formaldehyde/1.5%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer with 2.5% sucrose for 1 hour. Samples were then post-
fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide for 30 minutes before dehydration with graded ethanol solutions. Samples
were dehydrated using CO2 critical point drying followed by sputter-coating with platinum and images were
taken with FEI Quanta 200 SEM (Hillsboro, OR).
Lipid content
Total lipid content was determined using a triglyceride colorimetric assay. Samples were finely cut, then
lipids were extracted by the Schwartz method using organic solvents and concentrated by evaporation.
                                                                         21

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Enzymatic hydrolysis of triglycerides by lipase to glycerol and free fatty acids was carried out using Infinity
TG Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Glycerol was detected by
absorbance at 540nm. Absolute glycerol concentrations were determined from a standard curve and the
percentage of lipids removed from AAT was determined relative to control adipose samples.
Collagen content
Collagen content was determined in AAT using a hydroxyproline assay kit (Sigma Aldrich) similarly to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Pure collagen from bovine Achilles tendon (Sigma-Aldrich) was included as a
control to calculate the number of hydroxyproline residues per molecule of collagen 30. AAT samples were
first lyophilized, then hydrolyzed in 6 N HCl (120°C for 3 hours), diluted, transferred to assay wells, vacuum
dried, then incubated at 60°C in assay reagents prior to reading absorbance at 560 nm. To eliminate any
effect from endogenous interfering compounds, a collagen-spiked control sample was included to determine
a correction factor. All samples were assayed at four dilutions in triplicate to calculate the mean
hydroxyproline and collagen content of each sample.
Proteomic analysis
Adipose and dermal extracellular matrix samples were cryomilled (SPEX Sample Prep, Metuchen, NJ) and
solubilized in 4 M guanidine HCl and 50 mM sodium acetate at pH 5.8, then total protein was quantified by
BCA and diluted to 0.5 M guanidine HCl using distilled water. Samples were reduced in 50 mM TCEP,
incubated at 37°C with vortexing for 1 hour, alkylated in 0.1 M MMTS, and incubated at room temperature
for 15 minutes. Deglycosylation was carried out using deglycosylation enzyme mix (New England Biolabs)
for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were then digested overnight with 2% trypsin (Promega) at 37°C with
vortexing, followed by addition of a second aliquot of 2% trypsin for an additional 4 hours.
                                                                         22

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) analysis of peptides
was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a 2D nanoLC system
(Eksigent). Peptides were fractionated by reverse‐phase HPLC on a 75 μm x 10 cm PicoFrit column with a
15 μm emitter (PF3360‐75‐15‐N‐5, New Objective) in‐house packed with Magic C18AQ (5 μm, 120Å,
Michrom) using 1‐45% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient over 90 min at 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides
were sprayed directly into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos at 2.0 kV. Survey scans (full ms) were acquired from 350‐
1800 m/z with up to 10 peptide masses (precursor ions) individually isolated with a 1.2 Da window and
fragmented (MS/MS) using a collision energy of HCD35, 30s dynamic exclusion. Precursor and the
fragment ions were analyzed at 30,000 and 15,000 resolutions, respectively. Peptide sequences were
identified from isotopically resolved masses in MS and MS/MS spectra and searched against all human
entries in RefSeq 2012, with oxidation on M, carbamidomethylation on C and Mascot Daemon (Matrix
Science) software. Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses were 10 ppm and 0.03 Da,
respectively. Mascot search result files were processed in Scaffold (Proteome Software) or Proteome
Discoverer to validate protein and peptide identifications.
In Vitro Studies
Adipose-derived stem cell isolation
Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) were isolated by digestion of fresh adipose from abdominoplasty surgical
discards with 1 mg/ml collagenase I (Worthington) in DMEM F-12 (Gibco) for 1.5 hours on an orbital
shaker at 37°C. The resulting cell suspension was filtered through 70 μm and 40 μm cell strainers. ASCs
were seeded at 5,000 cells/cm2 and cultured in ASC maintenance media containing DMEM F-12, 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Scientific HyClone), 100 U/mL penicillin and 10 μg/mL streptomycin and
passaged at 80%-90% confluency. Cells were used between passages 3-5 for all studies.
ASC migration assay
                                                                         23

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
ASCs were serum starved for 24 hours, then trypsinized and seeded in the top chambers of a 6.5 mm / 8.0
μm pore size polystyrene transwells (Corning) at 30,000 cells per transwell. A solution of 1% (v/v) AAT in
DMEM F-12 media (Life Technologies) was added in the bottom chamber. Bottom chambers containing 0%
or 10% FBS in DMEM F-12 media were used as negative and positive controls. Migrated cells were
quantified after 6 hours using ImageJ software (NIH).
Adipogenic differentiation of cells in 2D culture on AAT
AAT was embedded in OCT, cryosectioned at 200 μm and collected on a positive charge coated glass slide.
OCT was removed by incubating slides in PBS on an orbital shaker with three changes each at 1-hour
intervals. ASCs were seeded directly on the adipose matrix on slides or on empty glass slides and cultured in
ASC maintenance media or adipogenic media. Adipogenic differentiation was carried out for ASCs seeded
on the matrix with adipogenic induction media (1 μM dexamethasone, 200 μM indomethacin, 500 μM
methylisobutylxanthine, 10 μg/ml insulin, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 10% FBS in High Glucose
DMEM). Cells were differentiated for 7 days in culture before fixation for histological analysis. Slides were
fixed for 10 minutes in 10% formalin and stained with Texas Red-phalloidin (Invitrogen) for actin, Nile Red
for lipids, and rabbit anti-collagen type I antibodies (Fitzgerald) followed by FITC-AffiniPure goat anti-
rabbit IgG secondary antibodies (Jackson) for visualization of the ECM scaffold and mounted with
Vectashield plus DAPI (Vector Labs).
Adipo-inductive capacity in 3D culture
ASCs were resuspended in cryomilled adipose ECM or reconstituted micronized acellular dermis (Cymetra)
at 2 million cells per 50 µl construct and seeded in the top chamber of a 6.5 mm transwell (Corning). After
culturing in ASC maintenance media for 48 hours (10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, 10 µg/mL streptomycin
in DMEM F-12), constructs were transferred into adipogenic induction media (1 μM dexamethasone, 200
μM indomethacin, 500 μM methylisobutylxanthine, 10 μg/ml insulin, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 10%
                                                                         24

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
FBS in High Glucose DMEM). Cells were differentiated for 7 days in culture on an orbital shaker. For
histological analysis, constructs were fixed in 10% formalin overnight, infiltrated with graded sucrose
solutions, and embedded in OCT. Samples were cryosectioned at 10 μm sections and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin or Oil Red O (0.75% w/v in 36% triethyl phosphate) for lipid accumulation.
qRT-PCR on human ASCs cultured in AAT
Snap frozen samples were homogenized in liquid nitrogen, then placed immediately placed in Trizol Reagent
(Invitrogen) and total RNA extraction was carried out according to manufacturer instructions with the
addition of 1 μg of glycogen added to each sample to aid in RNA precipitation. RNA quantified by
Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). cDNA was synthesized using the SuperScript RT III system (Invitrogen) and
RT-PCR was carried using Power SYBR Green reagent (Applied Biosystems) on an Applied Biosystems
7500 Real-Time PCR Instrument. Each PCR reaction was carried out in triplicate with three biological
replicates. Relative quantitation was performed using the ∆∆Ct method 31 with beta actin as the
housekeeping gene and normalization to expression levels in acellular dermis samples at Day 3. Primer
sequences for human adipogenic genes are listed in Table S8.
In Vivo Studies
All animal procedures were approved by Johns Hopkins Institutional Care and Use Committee (IACUC). All
patient procedures were approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board. Swine were housed and
received veterinary care at an accredited AAALAC-1 research facility (Thomas D. Morris, Inc., Hunt Valley,
MD).
Isolation of human lipoaspirate
Human lipoaspirate was obtained from patients undergoing liposuction. An epinephrine solution (1:500,000
in normal saline) was infiltrated into the surgical site and adipose tissue was aspirated using a 2.5 mm
                                                                         25

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
diameter blunt tip cannula attached to a Luer-lock syringe. Lipoaspirate was repeatedly washed with normal
saline (added at a 1:1 v/v ratio) and allowed to decant at room temperature between washes to aid in removal
of blood and infiltration fluids. Excess saline was removed and lipoaspirate was loaded in syringes for
injection.
In vivo adipogenesis of AAT combined with ASCs in athymic nude mice
Female, 6-week old athymic mice (n = 12) received injections of adipose ECM with and without ASCs (2
million cells resuspended in 0.2 cc of AAT immediately prior to injection). Volume measurements were
taken with digital calipers every two weeks beginning at 24 hours post-injection. Implants were removed at
each of the study timepoints of 1, 4, and 12 weeks for histological analysis (n = 4).
Volume retention of AAT vs. lipoaspirate in athymic nude mice
Volume retention of AAT in comparison to the clinical standard of fat grafting was evaluated in 6-week old
female athymic mice (n = 6). Each animal received subcutaneous injections of human lipoaspirate and AAT
at discrete sites along the dorsum (0.2 cc of each material). Volume of the implanted material was measured
using digital calipers immediately after injection then every two weeks until the study endpoint. After 12
weeks, implants were removed and fixed for histology.
Local scaffold-induced immune responses in mice with VML injuries
Mice aged 6 - 8 weeks were used to study immune responses induced by different adipose ECMs used to
treat a severe muscle defect. Female wild-type C57BL/6 (Charles River) and 4get mice underwent bilateral
volumetric muscle loss (VML) procedures to create a surgical defect in the quadriceps femoris muscle using
previously described methods 11. Defects were immediately filled with 0.05 cc of either ECM material or
sterile DPBS. ECM materials included AAT from xenogeneic (human or porcine), allogeneic (male outbred
                                                                         26

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
CD-1 mice, aged >18 weeks) and syngeneic (C57BL/6 mice) sources. After 1 week, animals were sacrificed
and both quadriceps were collected for analysis.
Flow cytometry on scaffold-associated immune cells in mouse studies
Specimens were pooled for each individual mouse then finely diced in 1X DPBS on ice, digested for 45
minutes at 37°C in an enzyme solution consisting of 1.67 Wunsch U/ml Liberase TL (Sigma-Aldrich) and
0.2 mg/ml DNAse I (Roche) in RPMI 1640, and filtered sequentially through 100 μm and 70 µm cell
strainers. Cells were stained on ice with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua viability dye (Thermo Fisher) followed
by a cocktail of surface markers (see Supplemental Methods). Stained cells were fixed using Cytofix reagent
(BD Biosciences) and stored in DPBS supplemented with 2% FBS for up to 12 hours prior to data
acquisition. Data was obtained using an LSRII flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and analysis was conducted
with FlowJo software. Gating was determined based on fluorescence minus one (FMO) plus isotype controls.
Reagents were obtained from BioLegend unless otherwise noted.
qRT-PCR on AAT implants in murine tissue
Tissue samples collected from C57BL/6 mice were processed as described above. Relative quantitation was
performed using the ∆∆Ct method 31 with beta-2-microglobulin (B2m) as the housekeeping gene and
normalization to expression levels in uninjured quadriceps muscle. Primer sequences for murine type 1 and
type 2 immune response genes are listed in Table S9.
Biocompatibility and retention of large implant volumes in swine
Porcine adipose tissue (Wagner Meats, Mt. Airy MD) was processed by the same protocol as human adipose
tissue to create an allogeneic AAT for swine studies. Female Yorkshire cross pigs (n = 3), aged 2.5 months,
each received eight injections of allogeneic porcine-derived AAT for a total volume of 48 cc. Large single
injections of 10 cc and 20 cc were placed in the flank; six smaller injections (3 cc) were placed in the ear,
                                                                         27

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
neck, forelimb, left and right hindlimbs, and flank. Volume measurements were taken using digital calipers
immediately post-injection and at the study endpoint of 4 weeks.
Histology on animal tissue
Samples were retrieved from the animals (mice or pigs) and fixed in a 10% formalin solution overnight.
Samples were subsequently processed with dehydration in graded ethanol solutions, cleared in xylene and
paraffin embedded. Sections were cut at 5 μm and slides were stained using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
Cell counts were quantified from a DAPI nuclear stain using ImageJ software.
First-In-Human Testing
A Phase I clinical study was conducted at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (Baltimore,
MD) with approval by the Johns Hopkins University IRB.
Clinical trial design
An open-label pilot study was conducted in healthy volunteers undergoing elective surgery for the removal
of redundant tissue. Eight participants (n = 8) were enrolled and received up to 4 cc of AAT subcutaneously
in the abdomen, with 1 cc and 2 cc volumes for individual injection sites. AAT was placed during an
outpatient procedure under local anesthesia using a blunt needle and following standard injection procedures.
Follow-up visits (Week 1, 2, 4, and post-excision) consisted of a physician assessment of the injected area,
photographic documentation of the injection sites, review of concomitant medications, and recording of any
unanticipated or serious adverse events potentially associated with the injection procedure. At the end of
their assigned study time point, participants had all AAT implants removed simultaneously during their
elective surgery after: 1 week (±2d, n=2), 2 weeks (±2d, n=2), 4 weeks (±2d, n=2), 6 weeks (±2d, n=1) or 18
weeks (±2d, n=1) in situ. Abdominal tissue containing the implants was excised by the surgeon and collected
by the study team. Implant(s) were excised to include a thin circumferential layer of native tissue and
                                                                         28

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
prepared for histopathological and flow cytometry analyses. Three to five control adipose samples
(approximately 1 g each, taken >10 cm away from injection sites) were also collected from each participant.
Safety and tolerability
The primary outcome of safety was determined by the incidence and rate of adverse events, as well as
assessment of tolerability through participant-reported comfort and physician-reported ease-of-use with the
intervention. Participant blood was also screened by a panel reactive antibody (PRA) test to detect changes in
levels of circulating anti-HLA (human leukocyte antigen) and other antibodies against human antigens at
after treatment, which could indicate an allogeneic reaction by the subject to the AAT. PRA assessments
were conducted at 4- and 12-weeks post-injection and compared to a baseline pre-injection blood draw.
Histopathology
Histopathological analysis of implants was performed between 1 – 18 weeks post-injection. Samples were
fixed in 10% formalin, serially dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions, cleared in xylene, and embedded in
paraffin. Samples were sectioned at 5 µm thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). For each
participant, a trained pathologist scored sections from the AAT implant and an area of distal adipose as an
untreated control site.
Immunostaining
Multispectral immunohistochemistry was performed by sequential rounds of antigen retrieval and
immunostaining using Opal Multiplex IHC reagents (Perkin Elmer). Deparaffinized and rehydrated slides
were boiled in a microwave for 15 minutes in AR6 buffer (Perkin Elmer), then incubated at room
temperature in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 minutes, blocked (4% normal goat serum/1% BSA or 10% BSA
in 0.05% Tween-20 in TBS) for 30 minutes, and incubated with primary antibody for 30 minutes. Secondary
detection was performed by incubating sections in MACH 4 Universal HRP-polymer (Biocare Medical) for
                                                                         29

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
10 minutes, then in Opal substrate working solution for 10 minutes. Antigen retrieval and staining was then
repeated for each primary antibody. Primary antibodies were purchased from Abcam and included: rabbit
anti-human CD4, mouse anti-human CD8, rabbit anti-human CD31, and mouse anti-human CD34. After
sequential immunostaining, sections were incubated in Opal DAPI working solution for 5 minutes and
mounted in DAKO fluorescent mounting media (Agilent Technologies). Slides were stored at 4°C until
imaging.
Flow cytometry on human tissue-derived leukocytes
Analysis of immune cell recruitment and cytokine expression was performed on dissociated AAT implants
and normal adjacent tissue samples using separate panels for myeloid and lymphoid markers. Specimens
were finely diced in 1X DPBS on ice, digested for 45 minutes at 37°C in an enzyme solution consisting of
1.67 Wunsch U/ml Liberase TL (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 mg/ml DNAse I (Roche) in RPMI 1640, and
filtered sequentially through 100 μm and 70 μm cell strainers. For intracellular staining, cells were
stimulated for 4 hours at 37°C in RPMI 1640 media (Gibco) with Cell Stimulation Cocktail Plus Protein
Transport Inhibitors (eBioscience) prior to staining. Cells were stained on ice with LIVE/DEAD Fixable
Aqua viability dye (Thermo Fisher) followed by a cocktail of surface markers, then fixed using Cytofix
reagent (BD Biosciences). For intracellular staining, cells were then permeated using Perm/Wash buffer (BD
Biosciences) and stained for intracellular markers. Cells were stored in DPBS supplemented with 2% FBS
for up to 12 hours prior to data acquisition. Data was obtained using an LSRII flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences) and analysis was conducted with FlowJo software. Gating was determined based on
fluorescence minus one (FMO) plus isotype controls. Specific antibodies included in each panel are listed in
the Supplemental Methods.
Statistical analyses
                                                                         30

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software. In grouped analyses with a single
variable, significance was determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the Holm-Sidak
correction for multiple comparisons where applicable (α = 0.05). Significance in grouped analyses with two
variables was calculated using two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc testing (α = 0.05). P values less than
0.05 were considered statistically significant (* < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001, **** < 0.0001). Plotted
values represent the arithmetic mean of the data set. Error bars represent +/- one standard deviation.
Acknowledgements: The authors wish particularly to thank the participants in our clinical study and tissue
donors who enable this research. We also thank L. Chung, K. Sadtler, and J. Andorko for flow cytometry
assistance, M. Wolf for assistance with multispectral IHC assay development, C. Loveland for experimental
assistance, the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center (SKCCC) Flow Cytometry Core, and the
Johns Hopkins Reference Histology Lab. Funding: This work was supported by the Arms Forces Institute
for Regenerative Medicine (AFIRM II). Author contributions: A.E.A., I.W., and J.H.E. conceptualized
these studies and drafted the manuscript. A.E.A., I.W., A.P., and J.H.E. contributed to experimental design
and interpretation of results. A.E.A., I.W., and A.P. conducted experiments, analyzed data, and prepared
figures. I.G. assisted with experimental procedures related to AAT development. D.R.M. performed 4get
mouse breeding and assisted in experimental procedures. A.T. assisted on flow cytometry panel design and
interpretation of flow data for human studies. R.P., J.A., C.C., P.B., and D.C. participated in or managed
clinical activities for Phase 1 testing. All authors participated in editing and revising the manuscript text and
figures. Competing interests: J.H.E. holds equity in Aegeria Soft Tissue, a company that has licensed JHU
intellectual property for the AAT material used in this study. The conflict is being managed by the Johns
Hopkins Office of Policy Coordination. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data
                                                                         31

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
and materials availability: All data associated with this study are present in the paper or the Supplementary
Materials. All primary data and analyses related to this manuscript are available upon request.
                                                                        32

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
REFERENCES
1      Ring, A. et al. Reconstruction of Soft-Tissue Defects at the Foot and Ankle after Oncological Resection.
       Frontiers in Surgery 3, doi:10.3389/fsurg.2016.00015 (2016).
2      Butterwick, K. J., Nootheti, P. K., Hsu, J. W. & Goldman, M. P. Autologous fat transfer: an in-depth look at
       varying concepts and techniques. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 15, 99-111, viii,
       doi:10.1016/j.fsc.2006.10.003 (2007).
3      Carvajal, J. & Patino, J. H. Mammographic findings after breast augmentation with autologous fat injection.
       Aesthet Surg J 28, 153-162, doi:10.1016/j.asj.2007.12.008 (2008).
4      Pulagam, S. R., Poulton, T. & Mamounas, E. P. Long-term clinical and radiologic results with autologous fat
       transplantation for breast augmentation: case reports and review of the literature. Breast J 12, 63-65,
       doi:10.1111/j.1075-122X.2006.00188.x (2006).
5      Rosson, G. D. et al. A review of the surgical management of breast cancer: plastic reconstructive techniques
       and timing implications. Ann Surg Oncol 17, 1890-1900, doi:10.1245/s10434-010-0913-7 (2010).
6      Rubin, J. P. & Marra, K. G. in Adipose-Derived Stem Cells: Methods and Protocols (eds Jeffrey M. Gimble &
       Bruce A. Bunnell) 395-400 (Humana Press, 2011).
7      Gilbert, T. W., Sellaro, T. L. & Badylak, S. F. Decellularization of tissues and organs. Biomaterials 27, 3675-
       3683, doi:http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.02.014 (2006).
8      Wainwright, D. J. Use of an acellular allograft dermal matrix (AlloDerm) in the management of full-thickness
       burns. Burns 21, 243-248, doi:10.1016/0305-4179(95)93866-i (1995).
9      Brown, B. N. et al. Macrophage phenotype as a predictor of constructive remodeling following the
       implantation of biologically derived surgical mesh materials. Acta biomaterialia 8, 978-987 (2012).
10     Sicari, B. M. et al. An acellular biologic scaffold promotes skeletal muscle formation in mice and humans with
       volumetric muscle loss. Sci Transl Med 6, 234ra258, doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.30080856/234/234ra58 [pii]
       (2014).
11     Sadtler, K. et al. Developing a pro-regenerative biomaterial scaffold microenvironment requires T helper 2
       cells. Science 352, 366-370, doi:10.1126/science.aad9272 (2016).
12     Goh, Y. P. et al. Eosinophils secrete IL-4 to facilitate liver regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 9914-
       9919, doi:10.1073/pnas.1304046110 (2013).
13     Heredia, J. E. et al. Type 2 innate signals stimulate fibro/adipogenic progenitors to facilitate muscle
       regeneration. Cell 153, 376-388, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.053 (2013).
14     Li, J. et al. An Interleukin 4 Loaded Bi-phasic 3D Printed Scaffold Promotes Osteochondral Defect
       Regeneration. Available at SSRN 3600426.
15     Liu, X. et al. Interleukin-4 is essential for microglia/macrophage M2 polarization and long-term recovery after
       cerebral ischemia. Stroke 47, 498-504 (2016).
16     Wu, I., Nahas, Z., Kimmerling, K. A., Rosson, G. D. & Elisseeff, J. H. An injectable adipose matrix for soft-tissue
       reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 129, 1247-1257, doi:10.1097/PRS.0b013e31824ec3dc (2012).
17     Kochhar, A. et al. A comparison of the rheologic properties of an adipose-derived extracellular matrix
       biomaterial, lipoaspirate, calcium hydroxylapatite, and cross-linked hyaluronic acid. JAMA facial plastic
       surgery 16, 405-409 (2014).
18     Ross, R. J., Shayan, R., Mutimer, K. L. & Ashton, M. W. Autologous fat grafting: current state of the art and
       critical review. Ann Plast Surg 73, 352-357, doi:10.1097/SAP.0b013e31827aeb51 (2014).
19     Naba, A. et al. The matrisome: in silico definition and in vivo characterization by proteomics of normal and
       tumor extracellular matrices. Mol Cell Proteomics 11, M111 014647, doi:10.1074/mcp.M111.014647 (2012).
20     Wu, I., Yang, J., Anderson, A. & Elisseeff, J. Design and translation of an adipose-derived soft tissue substitute
       (Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 2014).
                                                                        33

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
    (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
21     Atisha, D. & Alderman, A. K. A systematic review of abdominal wall function following abdominal flaps for
       postmastectomy breast reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg 63, 222-230, doi:10.1097/SAP.0b013e31818c4a9e
       (2009).
22     Cornejo, A., Ivatury, S., Crane, C. N., Myers, J. G. & Wang, H. T. Analysis of Free Flap Complications and
       Utilization of Intensive Care Unit Monitoring. J Reconstr Microsurg, doi:10.1055/s-0033-1345434 (2013).
23     Healy, C. & Ramakrishnan, V. Autologous microvascular breast reconstruction. Arch Plast Surg 40, 3-10,
       doi:10.5999/aps.2013.40.1.3 (2013).
24     Gold, M. H., Kinney, B. M., Kaminer, M. S., Rohrich, R. J. & D'Amico, R. A. A multi-center, open-label, pilot
       study of allograft adipose matrix for the correction of atrophic temples. J Cosmet Dermatol 19, 1044-1056,
       doi:10.1111/jocd.13363 (2020).
25     Beachley, V. Z. et al. Tissue matrix arrays for high-throughput screening and systems analysis of cell function.
       Nat Methods 12, 1197-1204, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3619 (2015).
26     Bosurgi, L. et al. Macrophage function in tissue repair and remodeling requires IL-4 or IL-13 with apoptotic
       cells. Science 356, 1072-1076, doi:10.1126/science.aai8132 (2017).
27     Huleihel, L. et al. Matrix-bound nanovesicles within ECM bioscaffolds. Science advances 2, e1600502 (2016).
28     Chung, L. et al. Interleukin 17 and senescent cells regulate the foreign body response to synthetic material
       implants in mice and humans. Sci Transl Med 12, doi:eaax3799 [pii]
       10.1126/scitranslmed.aax379912/539/eaax3799 [pii] (2020).
29     Dziki, J. et al. An acellular biologic scaffold treatment for volumetric muscle loss: results of a 13-patient
       cohort study. NPJ Regen Med 1, 16008, doi:10.1038/npjregenmed.2016.8 (2016).
30     Kliment, C. R., Englert, J. M., Crum, L. P. & Oury, T. D. A novel method for accurate collagen and biochemical
       assessment of pulmonary tissue utilizing one animal. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 4, 349-355 (2011).
31     Livak, K. J. & Schmittgen, T. D. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and
       the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25, 402-408, doi:10.1006/meth.2001.1262 (2001).
                                                                        34

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
FIGURES AND TABLES
Fig. 1. An adipose-derived biomaterial, Acellular Adipose Tissue (AAT), retains tissue-specific
properties favoring in vitro chemo-attraction and adipogenesis. (A) Macroscopic representation of whole
adipose tissue processing into an injectable, adipose extracellular matrix biomaterial. (B) Gross images of
cadaveric native adipose tissue. (C) Nile red staining of the central lipid droplets in native adipose tissue
(fat). (D) Fluorescent staining of the collagenous extracellular matrix (Col1) surrounding cells in native
adipose tissue. (E) Gross image of the decellularized and delipidated processing intermediate. (F)
Decellularized and delipidated processing intermediate stained for intracellular lipids using Oil Red O. (G)
Gross image of the final injectable product. (H) Scanning electron microscopy of AAT. (I) Col1 fluorescent
staining of AAT. (J) Total lipid content of AAT and matched donor adipose demonstrating >98% lipid
removal in processing. (K) Total collagen content determined by a hydroxyproline assay. (L) AAT-induced
migration of adipose-derived stem cells within 6 hours in a trans-well assay. (M) AAT reseeded with ASCs

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
stained fluorescently for Col1 and Actin. (N) Nile Red staining for intracellular lipids in ASC-containing
AAT supplemented with adipogenic media supplementation. (O) Number of shared and unique proteins
between AAT and ACD by LC-MS/MS. (P) Categorization of peptides identified in AAT and ACD by LC-
MS/MS. (Q) 3D constructs of ASCs cultured in ACD and AAT. (R) Oil Red O staining from both the edge
and center of constructs and (S) differential gene expression for adipogenic markers within 3D constructs
normalized to ACD on Day 3.

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Fig. 2. AAT demonstrates volume retention and superior biocompatibility in athymic mice. (A)
Volume retention for human lipoaspirate (fat grafting) and AAT injected subcutaneously in athymic nude
mice, as measured trans-dermally using digital calipers, with gross images of recovered implants after 12
weeks in situ. (B) Volume persistence in AAT versus in AAT supplemented with ASCs when implanted in
athymic nude mice, with gross images of recovered implants after 12 weeks in situ. (C-E) H&E staining of
implants recovered after 12 weeks, with implant boundaries indicated by dashed lines. (C) Adipogenesis and
vascularization (arrows) within the AAT implant. (D) Signs of calcification (arrows) and cyst formation (*)
within fat grafts. (E) New adipose tissue formation (arrows) within ASC-containing AAT implants.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Fig. 3. AAT elicits pro-regenerative responses in a surgical wound model of irreversible volumetric
muscle loss (VML) by recruiting Il4 expressing immune cells. (A) Mice with bilateral surgical resections
in the quadriceps muscles were treated with direct application of an AAT scaffold or saline to the wound site
immediately post-op. Animals were sacrificed after 1 week to evaluate local immune responses to the
biomaterials by flow cytometry. (B) Gross images of healthy quadriceps muscle and VML wounds treated
with either vehicle (saline) or an AAT scaffold 1-week post-injury. (C) Flow cytometry gating of immune
populations in mouse experiments. (D) Immune cell populations isolated from uninjured (healthy) control
quadriceps muscles and muscle wounds treated with saline or an allogenic (mouse AAT, mAAT) or
xenogeneic (human AAT, hAAT) ECM scaffold. (E) Il4 expression by percentage and median fluorescence
intensity (MFI) of eosinophils and (F) CD4+ T cells isolated from wounds in 4get mice. Significance relative
to vehicle control is indicated.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Fig. 4. AAT scaffolds skew macrophages towards an M2 phenotype in muscle wounds. (A) CD206 and
CD86 expression in macrophages isolated from healthy quadriceps muscle and scaffold- or saline-treated
muscle wounds after 1-week post-op. (B) Populations of alternately activated “M2” (CD206+CD86-),
classically activated “M1” (CD206-CD86+), double-polarized (CD206+CD86+) and non-polarized (CD206-
CD86-) macrophages quantified by flow cytometry. (C) Expression of canonical M2 (Il4, Arg1) and M1
(Ifng, iNos) genes at the wound site by qRT-PCR. Significance relative to vehicle control is indicated.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Fig. 5. Allogenic AAT is safe and persistent at large volumes. (A) Porcine adipose-derived ECM implants
injected subcutaneously in Yorkshire cross pigs, imaged immediately post-injection and after 1 month in
situ. (B) Gross image and H&E staining of porcine-derived adipose ECM after 1 month in situ; high
magnification images of the edge and center showing cellular infiltration, including eosinophils (arrows). (C)
Volume retention ratio after 1 month in situ by initial injection volume. (D) Cell count ratio between edge
and center of porcine implants by initial injection volume.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                         It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Fig. 6. Subcutaneous injection of AAT in healthy volunteers. (A) H&E staining of AAT implants excised
from healthy volunteers at early, mid and late time-points during a first-in-human Phase 1 study. High
magnification insets show cell migration from the adjacent host tissue into the AAT matrix. (B)
Multispectral immunohistochemistry (IHC) reveals formation of blood vessels (CD31+) and migration of
adipose stem cells (CD34+). (C) CD4+ and CD8+ T cell infiltration by multispectral IHC. (D) Flow
cytometry analysis was performed on recovered samples from six subjects to quantify immune cells (CD45+)

  medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
recruited within AAT implant(s) relative to multiple samples of subject-matched adipose tissue collected
distally from the injection site. Results for each recovered AAT implant were normalized to the average of
multiple samples of subject-matched adipose tissue. Data shown pooled for all subjects. (E) Relative
abundance of different immune cell subsets including granulocytes (CD11b+CD15+), macrophages
(CD11b+CD15-CD11c+MHCII+CD14+), and T cells (CD3+). Data shown pooled for all subjects. (F) Relative
expression of FoxP3 as well as TH1, TH2, and TH17 cytokines in T cells isolated from AAT and matched
adipose tissue, shown pooled for all subjects. (G) Expression of macrophage polarization markers (CD163
and CD80) in AAT and matched-adipose tissue from all six individuals. (H) Average distribution of M1
(CD80+CD163-), M2 (CD163+CD80-), double-positive and non-polarized macrophages in AAT and
matched-adipose tissue as a frequency of total macrophages. (I) Expression of macrophage polarization
(CD163, CD80) and lineage markers (CD11b, CD14) by MFI, pooled for all subjects.

   medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20206672.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
      (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Table 1. Subcutaneous injection of AAT in healthy volunteers
Table 1. Participant Information
Subject          Age          Sex      AAT Implant           Excision                    Surgical                   Injection Volumes              Total
                Range                  Time In Situ        Time Point                   Procedure                           (Sites)                Dose
   01          60 - 69 y       M              29 d             4 wk                 Panniculectomy                         1 cc (2)                2 cc
   02*         30 - 39 y        F             12 d             2 wk                 Panniculectomy                         1 cc (2)                2 cc
   03          50 - 59 y        F              5d              1 wk                Abdominoplasty                          2 cc (1)                2 cc
   04          20 - 29 y        F             16 d             2 wk                Abdominoplasty                          1 cc (2)                2 cc
   05          50 - 59 y        F             26 d             4 wk                 Panniculectomy                         1 cc (2)                2 cc
   06          50 - 59 y        F              6d              1 wk                 Panniculectomy                         1 cc (2)                2 cc
   07          40 - 49 y        F            127 d            18 wk                Abdominoplasty                          2 cc (1)                2 cc
   08          60 - 69 y        F             39 d             6 wk                 Panniculectomy                    1 cc (2), 2 cc (1)           4 cc
 Mean            48 y                       32.5 d                                                                                                2.25 cc
   SD           13.6 y                      40.0 d                                                                                                0.71 cc
*Subject 02 withdrew from the study prior to completing the 6-week post-excision visit and 12-week post-injection PRA due to travel restrictions.
