 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
       The Statistical Monitoring by Adaptive RMSTD Tests: an efficient, informative, and
    customizable method for the complete internal quality control intended for low-frequent
                                                 sampling of control measures
Author:
Christian Beier
Correspondence:
Christian Beier
Autoimmune Differentiation and Microbiological Expert Diagnostics
ADMEDIA Medical Care Center Waldenburg
Weg des Friedens 4
08396 Waldenburg
Germany
e-mail: christian.beier  admedia-diagnostik.de
Number of tables: 3
Number of figures: 2
Abstract:
Two control mechanisms are relevant to perform an internal quality assurance: a permissible limit
LSMC applied to single measures of control samples and a retrospective statistical analysis to detect
increased imprecision and baseline drifts. A common statistical metric is the root mean square
(total) deviation (RMSD/RMSTD). To focus on recent changes under low-frequent sampling
conditions, the monitored amount of retrospective data is usually very small. Unfortunately, the
calculated RMSTD of a small data set with n<50 samples has a significant statistical uncertainty
that needs to be considered in adequate limit definitions. In particular, the minimum reasonable
limit LRMSTD(n), applied to the RMSTD of a series of n samples, decreases from LSMC (e.g.,
2.33*standard_deviation+bias) for n=1 towards Ltrue_RMSTD for n→∞ (long-term statistics). Two
mathematical approaches were derived to reliably estimate an optimal function to adjust L RMSTD(n)
to small sample sizes.
This knowledge led to the development of a new quality-control method: the Statistical Monitoring
by Adaptive RMSTD Tests (SMART). SMART requires just one mandatory limit (either L SMC or
Ltrue_RMSTD) per analyte. By definition of up to 7 possible alert levels, SMART can early recognize
and evaluate both the significance of a single outlier and establishing critical trends or shifts in
recent SMC data. SMART is intended to efficiently monitor and evaluate small amounts of control
data.
Keywords:
SMART; internal quality control; clinical chemistry; statistical uncertainty; root mean square total
deviation; RMSD; RMSTD; multivariate CI; multidimensional confidence interval of a series;
MDCI; Rili-BAEK; retrospective analysis; multirule; Westgard
     NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
                                                                  1 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Abbreviations:
CI: confidence interval; CIΔup: upper limit of the confidence interval of Δ; Δ: the “true” RMSTD
value determined using large amounts of data; GPD: Gaussian probability density; IQC: internal
quality control; LSMC: IQC limit applied to single measures of a control material; L Δ: IQC limit
dedicated to the true (long-term) RMSTD; MDCI: multidimensional confidence interval; RA:
retrospective (statistical) analysis of SMC data; Rili-BAEK: Guideline of the German Medical
Association on Quality Assurance in Medical Laboratory Examinations; RMSD: root mean square
deviation (empirical standard deviation); RMSTD: root mean square total (or target) deviation with
respect to a known target value; SMART: Statistical Monitoring by Adaptive RMSTD Tests; SMC:
single measurements of a control sample
1 Introduction
Quality assurance and particularly the internal quality control (IQC) are essential requirements to
monitor measuring processes in industry and health care. The vast amount of related literature can
only be inadequately covered [1-5]. Fortunately, the homepage of Westgard et al. [6] has been
established as an informative hot spot with regard to quality assurance in clinical chemistry -
demonstrating that it is a versatile and still open topic.
Regulations concerning the IQC in clinical chemistry prescribe consecutive single measurements of
at least one control sample (SMC data). Each SMC value is compared to a given maximum
permissible limit (LSMC) to monitor the measuring uncertainty of an operating device as well as the
degradation state of used reagents. A lot of experience already exist to determine L SMC. The main
concepts base on state-of-the-art limits (utilizing performance metrics of the technique), biological
variation, and/or partitioned clinical decision ranges. The LSMC defines an in-control range for SMC
results with regard to the target value of the control sample. The target value is predefined either by
a reference institution or the manufacturer (labeled control sample). For unlabeled control samples a
substitute of the target value can be generated by oneself during an evaluation period and possibly
additional peer-group data. However, a self-evaluated target value restricts the IQC to a quality
monitoring with respect to the state during the evaluation period. Persistent systematic errors of the
device, lot, and procedure as well as long-term environmental influences are therefore probably
unnoticed.
Another integral part of IQC is a statistical retrospective analysis (RA) of quantitative SMC data at
the end of an evaluation period, at the ends of consecutive sampling periods, or by an on-the-fly
statistical approach [7-10]. An efficient and widely used statistical metric is the root mean square
(total) deviation (RMS(T)D), where “total” denotes the optional reference to a known target value
instead of the mean. The presented Statistical Monitoring by Adaptive RMSTD Tests (SMART)
method is primarily intended for the RMSTD metric. (The RMSTD is sometimes alternatively
denoted as the entire analytical measuring uncertainty.) Nevertheless, theoretical findings are
provided for both RMSTD and RMSD.
The RA has to handle a trade-off between a suitable number of SMC samples to reliably and
prospectively verify an in-control condition and to focus on most recent data to detect changes in
measuring precision as fast as possible. Particularly in clinical chemistry, the RA has to deal with
commonly low-frequent SMC measures (1-2 SMC per day and control sample) and limited
reasonable collection periods due to short reagent lifetimes or other frequent system interventions.
The presented SMART method has been designed to efficiently evaluate even few amounts of SMC
data.
                                                                  2 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
IQC procedures can be combined in multirule concepts [11]. One of the most prominent methods is
the “Westgard Sigma Rules” utilizing the Sigma Metric [12]. A detailed and well-structured
explanation is given in [13]. The current, improved version is specifically applicable for procedures
with different Sigma Metric. However, a procedure with a Sigma Metric of six has a critical
systematic error [13] of 4.35·s (i.e., a high potentially acceptable tolerance). In other words, the
technically achievable precision of the measurement is distinctly higher than necessary compared to
the biological variation, and one could permit a limited variation in accuracy (bias) and/or a certain
level of heteroscedasticity. Further, the usually small sample size (n=20-30) of regular evaluation
periods implies a high risk of significantly underestimated amounts of the parameters mean and
standard deviation due to statistical uncertainty (see [14]). Thus, the 3s entry rule of the Westgard
Sigma Rules (limit range for single SMC values: mean±3·s), which is the sole decision rule for high
Sigma Metrics, appears unnecessarily strict for procedures with a Sigma Metric of six (and even
four). Westgard's multirule concept supports a strictly serial order of decision rules. The SMART
method utilizes limit tests in parallel, enabling the possibility to further verify and categorize an out-
of-control signal.
Based on a chart of consecutive SMC values, the current standard deviation s n and unsigned bias
(mean inaccuracy) δn can be revealed by
                      n
  sn =
         √    1
                  ⋅∑ (y i − ȳ) 2 and δ n =|ȳ−y 0|
            n −1 i=1
                                                                                                                                   (1)
(yi: measured SMC, y0: target value, y: mean value, n: sample size of SMC chart). Particularly in
the case of low-frequent sampling, the parameters sn and δn are not strictly separable because:
(i) The measurement inaccuracy (bias) can vary even within a single chart due to unrecognized
changes in environmental or operating conditions. These shifts contribute to the amount of the
standard deviation.
(ii) The mean values of arbitrary SMC charts of length n scatter themselves with a dispersion of
s/√n. Thus, the standard deviation affects the possible amount of the mean value of a particular
chart - leading to an arbitrary contribution to the bias of this chart.
It is therefore suitable to solely focus on the entire analytical measuring uncertainty
                            n
  RMSTD n =
                   √  1
                         ⋅∑ (y −y ) 2 =
                      n i=1 i 0                  √  n−1 2
                                                      n
                                                           ⋅s n + δ 2n .                                                           (2)
The abbreviation RMSTD can either be considered as the root mean square total deviation or target
deviation, depending on the reliability of the target value y0. (The phrase “total deviation” implies
that y0 is very close to the true value.) As shown in the right-hand term, the RMSTD can also be
expressed as a Pythagorean addition of s n and δn, where the factor (n-1)/n can be neglected for
sufficiently large n. However, a separate analysis of standard deviation and bias might nevertheless
be useful during fault diagnostics. In addition to the general RMSTD metric, the abbreviation Δ will
be used to indicate the “true” RMSTD value that emerges if the statistical uncertainty becomes
negligible. Thus, the determination of Δ requires a large data set (see [14] for details).
To indicate out-of-control situations of measuring devices, the IQC usually utilizes at least two
maximum permissible deviation limits: one limit intended for each result of an SMC (L SMC) and one
limit dedicated to the statistical retrospective analysis. This study utilizes the root mean square total
deviation; thus, the statistical limits L RMSTD (for arbitrary n) or LΔ (for very large n) are used here.
However, since 2008 the German guideline on quality assurance in medical laboratories (Rili-
BAEK) [15] only provides one common, maximum permissible limit for both: single SMC and RA.
The limit values in the Rili-BAEK, table B1a-c, column 3 are presented as relative total errors Δrel
                                                                  3 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
(in per cent). The absolute value of the solely given, maximum permissible total error is given by
    Rili-BAEK     Δ rel⋅y0
  Δ max        =                                                                                                                   (3)
                  100 %
(y0: target value of the control sample). The current values Δmax (as prescribed in the Rili-BAEK) are
empirically determined and can be treated as approximately equivalent to LSMC; however, they are
distinctly too tolerant if considered as LΔ (see below).
For all analytes not listed in table B1a-c, the self-evaluation of internal laboratory maximum
deviation limits is required. These limits are obtained by following equation, utilizing the bias and
the t-fold standard deviation obtained during an evaluation period (t is usually set to 3)
               n−1 2 2
  Δ max =
            √   n
                     ⋅t ⋅s eval + δ 2eval                                                                                          (4)
(n: number of SMC values of the evaluation period, seval: standard deviation during evaluation, δeval:
bias during evaluation). The factor t with t>1 becomes necessary to receive a reasonably tolerant
limit for single SMC measures. However, Eq. (4) with t=3 may provide a still too restrictive limit
for SMC (and probably even for RA) in several situations: (i) underestimated s eval, δeval due to poor
statistics during evaluation period, (ii) measuring techniques with small imprecision but significant
inaccuracy, and/or (iii) a high Sigma Metric of the method (usable room for extended tolerance).
As revealed in [16], the implication of the present Rili-BAEK to use the same limit for both the
single SMC value and the RA is clearly problematic. In fact, the limits should optimally differ by a
factor of about two, where LSMC>LΔ (see [16] and Chapter 2.1). This finding and the given
statements to handle outliers require a complete revision of the currently prescribed RA of the
RiliBAEK [15]. Seeking a more powerful approach, the SMART method has been newly developed
and discussed here in detail. SMART is an RMSTD-based method facilitating evaluation of single
SMC results as well as on-the-fly statistical monitoring of recent SMC data. It is sufficient to apply
SMART with only one prescribed maximum permissible limit. Thus, two versions exist, depending
on the use of either LSMC or LΔ as the prescribed limit.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 The relation between optimal limits for SMC and RA
All limits defined in this article are unsigned values specifying a range around the target value
y0±Lgiven. The presented SMART method is intended to provide a common approach for the entire
IQC, considering only one prescribed maximum permissible limit. It is based on the finding that an
approximately constant relation exists between the optimal maximum permissible limits for one
SMC value (LSMC) and for the true RMSTD of a (hypothetically) very large retrospective set of
SMC data (LΔ) [16]. Hence, the general parameter λ is defined as the relation factor
         L max     κ⋅s max + δ max            κ+φ                     δ max
  λ = SMC       =                         =              with φ =            ,                                                     (5)
         LΔmax
                   √ s max + δ max √ 1+φ2
                        2          2                                  s max
                                                                  4 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
(smax: maximum permissible standard deviation; δmax: maximum permissible bias; κ: constant
expansion factor according to the desired confidence level). The sign Δ (true RMSTD) emphasizes
that - assuming a very large considered sample size - there is no remaining statistical uncertainty in
the determination of the RMSTD, standard deviation, and bias. In this case of a very large data set,
the confidence interval (CI) of Δ becomes negligible, and the limit LΔ can be reduced to be almost
equal to the expected exact RMSTD as given by Δ2=s2+δ2.
The factor λ only depends on the ratio between δmax and smax. This is shown in Eq. (5) by substitution
with the ratio φ=δmax/smax. Fig. 1 illustrates the mathematical relation between λ and φ for 2 common
κ. The factor κ in Eq. (5) can be chosen according to a one-sided CI, due to a generally distinct
maximum permissible bias, which is often similar or higher than s max.. A value between 1.96 (97.5%
confidence) and 2.33 (99%) is convenient to avoid regular false-positive outliers. For φ-ratios
significantly below 1, a two-sided CI is more realistic, which would change the CI level for κ=2.33
to 98%.
To get a profound idea about the distribution of φ over almost the entire spectrum of analytes in
clinical chemistry, Fig. 1 shows frequency histograms of φ-ratios based on data of Rili-BAEK 2003
(column 5/6) [17] and the database of desirable limits by Ricos et al. (version 2014) [18,19]. In the
latter case, the considered data are limited to entries, which are referenced by at least two
independent sources according to column 3 [18]. This limitation is based on the assumption that the
finally considered entries represent validated and established techniques to a greater extent. This
“multi-source” data set consists of 150 remaining entries. Except slightly less populated margin
areas, the histogram of the multi-source data is similar to the full-data histogram (compared in
[16]).
The Rili-BAEK data of 2003 (last official declaration of separate δmax and smax permissible limits)
represent curated state-of-the-art limits for 90 common analytes at a technological state 15 years
ago. Although the limit values are outdated, the ratios are assumed to stay approximately valid, due
to limited progress in bias prevention since 2003. Using Eq. (5) the Rili-BAEK data reveal λ values
in the range 2.19±0.25 (for κ=2.33) and 2.0±0.2 (for κ=1.96).
The desirable maximum bias and standard deviation entries by Ricos et al. (updated 2014) [18,19]
were derived from biological variations (see [20,21]). The 95% confidence intervals of λ based on
the multi-source dataset are 2.23±0.5 (for κ=2.33) and 2.0±0.4 (for κ=1.96). The approach used by
Ricos et al. that utilizes biological variations [20,21] is popular. However, the applied formulas are
not flexible enough to handle the entire spectrum of analytes, ranging from analytes with extremely
small ratios of intra-individual vs. inter-individual biological variation to analytes with dominant
within-subject variation (e.g., due to circadian rhythms or prandial state). The analyte-specific
desirable maximum limits for bias and standard deviation (based on biological variation) are usually
significantly more divergent, compared to curated state-of-the-art limits (see Fig. 1). In particular,
the desirable limit for the bias is often too liberal. Hence, statistics were redone under the restriction
that the bias is not allowed to be more than two times higher than the standard deviation (accepted
ratio φ≤2). This restriction excludes 17 of 150 entries (11.3%). The full ranges of remaining λ's are
then 2.30±0.34 (for κ=2.33) and 2.05±0.26 (for κ=1.96). Please mention that a ratio above 2 can
also be circumvented by accepting a more tolerant standard deviation.
Particularly with regard to the applied state-of-the-art permissible limits, one can finally conclude
that φ values of current measuring procedures are narrow enough to estimate a general λ value for
almost every analyte in clinical chemistry. Taking a rather restrictive significance level that only
allows about 1-2% false-positive outliers, the general λ value is within
  λ = 2.15 ± 0.35 .                                                                                                                (6)
This sufficiently well defined relation between LSMC and LΔ facilitates the explicit definition of only
one limit per analyte (either for SMC or long-term RMSTD) for the entire internal quality control.
                                                                  5 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Because of the special shape of λ(φ), the given range in Eq. (6) will remain valid even if future
progress in clinical chemistry succeeds to significantly reduce measurement biases. If only the
standard deviation needs to be monitored, λ would be equal to the κ value (two-sided CI).
2.2 Basics of the Statistical Monitoring by Adaptive RMSTD Tests
The SMART method provides a single formula for both the quality control of single SMC results as
well as an on-the-fly statistical monitoring of recent SMC data. Unfortunately, the calculated
RMSTD of small SMC series with n samples has an increased uncertainty (due to poor statistics)
that needs to be considered in adequate limit definitions. In particular, optimal limits depend on n
and exponentially decrease from LSMC (at n=1) to LΔ (for n→∞). Under consideration of the given
factor λ (see Chapter 2.1), it is sufficient to explicitly prescribe just one of the two limits.
Assuming a reliable method to determine intermediate limits, the general SMART formula
          n
  √  1
       ⋅∑ (y i−y 0 ) 2 ≤ L(λ , n) = a ( λ , n)⋅Lgiven
     n i =1
                                                                                                                                   (7)
utilizes RMSTD tests against variable limits L(λ,n), which depend on λ (a constant) and the varying
sample sizes n of the considered most recent SMC values. Again, the applied limits range from the
higher LSMC (n=1) to the distinctly lower LΔ (n>>1). Thus, a certain limit L(n), used for a series of n
samples, becomes increasingly less tolerant at larger sample series. Intermediate limits L(λ,n) are
expressed by the transition or adaptation function a(λ,n) that modifies a predefined limit Lgiven (see
next chapters). The curvature of a(λ,n) with regard to n has been deeply investigated by two
different mathematical approaches as discussed in Chapter 2.3.
After each new SMC measure, Eq. (7) is applied several times considering increasing numbers of
previous SMC measures. Thus, the SMART approach performs multiple limit controls, considering
the new SMC value (n=1) and up to n max latest SMC values of the same control sample. The
recommended maximum size of the entire retrospective window (i.e., the maximum number of
recognized, most recent SMC values) is nmax=15.
Particularly, for each new SMC value, the SMART formula is applied up to 8 times for chart lengths
of, e.g., n={1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15} including the retrospectively accumulated SMC values {y i}, {yi,yi-
1,yi-2}, {yi,yi-1,yi-2,yi-3,yi-4 }, …, {yi,yi-1,...,yi-n-1}. Hence, up to 8 potential violations of the n-dependent
limit levels might be revealed according to Eq. (7). The final evaluation of all 8 limit tests is done
by the definitions of alert levels given in Table 1. Alert levels and an efficient use of SMART during
the initial phase (available data below nmax) are discussed in Chapter 3.3.
Other variants of SMART settings (the “SMART plan”) are possible. The limit tests do not need to
be equidistantly distributed. Nevertheless, it is strongly recommended to keep the first two tests at
n=1 and n=3. To provide an efficient evaluation of SMART results, the number of applied limit tests
per SMART run should be at least 6. Another SMART plan of practical interest might be a
monitoring window of 19 most recent SMC values and 7 limit tests. These tests could accordingly
be done via successive increase of the analyzed data by additional 2-4 retrospective values
n={1,3,6,9,12,15,19}.
2.3 The curvature of the adaptation function
The considered data set of an RA is often very small on a statistical point of view. It results from a
                                                                  6 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                 perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
usually small retrospective time window (to ensure sufficient topicality) and/or a small available
count of SMC results due to low-frequent sampling. This has consequences for the applied
maximum permissible limits of statistical metrics, which are often defined for “sufficiently long”
charts of SMC data (i.e., with limited or no consideration of statistical uncertainties). The minimum
amount of collected SMC data to reliably apply such limits is commonly distinctly underestimated
(see Chapter 3.1). Regarding SMART we thus need to know, how RMSTD limit levels L(n) have to
be increased when they are applied to smaller and smaller sample sizes (due to the increased
statistical uncertainty). It is assumed that the limits merge with the limit L SMC at n=1. The functional
dependency of L(n)=a(n)·L(n=∞) on n is estimated by two different mathematical approaches
outlined in the following chapters. These approaches are fully explained and derived in [14].
Both approaches utilize a rather tolerant CI of 95%. The author recommends limits based on a
relatively narrow CI like 95% in combination with a constant small addition to all evaluated
parameters. The addition might be in the order of the difference in maximum amplitudes (at n=2)
between the CI-99% and CI-95% functions. Please also note that the final scale (i.e. range of
amplitudes) of SMART limits is actually only based on λ.
2.3.1 The maximum error propagation of statistical uncertainties
The statistical limit LRMSTD(n) must be equal or higher than the RMSTD of any possible in-control
SMC data set with n considered values. The maximum expected RMSTD value of a limited data set
can be approximated by the upper limit of the confidence interval (CI Δup) of the RMSTD metric. In
our case the CIΔup of the closely in-control true RMSTD value. It is therefore beneficial to estimate
the CIΔup for small sample sizes n, which will finally provide inference with regard to the curvature
of the adaptation function a(λ,n) of SMART.
In [14], a rather straightforward approach is presented to determine the true RMSTD value and to
approximate the CIΔup of the RMSTD metric. According to [14] the final function of CI Δup with
regard to the variable n results in
                                           χ 2n−1 ;0.95
  CI up
      Δ =
                S
            √ f +ν 2
                     ⋅ [ ν 2
                             +
                                f
                                2  ( 1 +
                                              n−1       ) +
                                                            ν⋅z 0.95
                                                             √n      ]  where ν=
                                                                                      δ mean
                                                                                         S
                                                                                                 and f=
                                                                                                          n−1
                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                   (8)
(n: number of considered SMC values, δmean: mean bias (unsigned difference between the overall
mean and the reference value), S: overall standard deviation, χ2 and z: quantiles of the chi-squared
and normal distributions). The parameters δmean and S may be evaluated by a big-data multi-chart
analysis of the measuring system as described in [14].
It is important to mention that the ratio ν=δmean/S is not directly comparable to φ, the ratio of the
maximum permissible single-chart values δmax and smax given in Eq. (5). The individual biases of
single SMC charts vary according to device-specific, operational, and environmental conditions
with a scatter parameter Sδ. The procedure, presented in [14], includes SMC data from several SMC
charts. In the overall statistics, the variability between biases of individual charts is thus part of the
overall standard deviation term S. This implicitly included variation of biases can be treated as
normal-distributed. Pure short-term dispersion (imprecision) and the variation of biases are further
sufficiently independent; thus, the overall variance is the sum of both variances S 2=S2imp+S2δ. The
remaining mean bias δmean is just the difference between the overall mean value and the target value.
If the target value is a pre-evaluated nominal value, δmean is expected to be very small in relation to
S. However, the amount of δmean might be still significant, if the target value was revealed by a more
precise reference method. In general, the ratio ν=δmean/S is expected to be clearly non-zero but
distinctly smaller than the ratio φ (defined in Chapter 2.1)
                                                                   7 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                  perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
                                δ mean δmax
  0< ν<φ          or      0<             <         .                                                                              (9)
                                  S         smax
With regard to common relations between δmax and smax as presented in Fig. 1, a proper value for ν is
approx. 0.6 with an assumed maximum uncertainty of about ±0.5. Further, the decision to apply a
one- or two-sided 95% CI for the parameter z 95% also depends on ν. If the amount of δmean is almost
as high as S (or even higher), a one-sided CI is more suitable than a two-sided CI. If one apply a
smooth transition between two-sided (ν=0, z=1.96) and one-sided (ν=1, z=1.645) statistics, the
dependency of CIΔup on such ν-z combinations is relatively small, with a broad central maximum at
about ν=0.3-0.5 [14]. The combination of ν=0.6 and z95%=1.7 (or z99%=2.4) is considered as a
feasible representative choice for all relevant ν-z combinations.
As already mentioned, a limit function for RMSTD values must be equal (or higher) than the upper
CI limit of Δ. To focus on the curvature of CIΔup that only depends on the ratio between δmean and S,
the CIΔup function is normalized by its value at infinite n. At n→∞ all statistical uncertainties can be
neglected and CIΔup becomes equal to the true RMSTD: CIΔup(∞)=Δ∞=S·√1+ν2 . Thus, the relative
limit function is finally
                                             f        χ 2n−1; 0.95     ν⋅z 0.95
  L RMSTD
    rel    (n) = upΔ
                    CI up  (n)
                                 =
                                         2
                                      ν + 1+
                                             2 (        n−1        ) +
                                                                         √n                                                      (10)
                   CI Δ (∞)                    √(f + ν 2 )(1 + ν 2 )
(n: sample size; f=(n-1)/n; ν=δmean/S; χ2 and z: 95%-quantiles of the chi-squared and normal
distributions).
The given mathematical approach is intended to estimate the statistical uncertainty of an RMSTD of
small series. However, the presented model becomes itself distinctly uncertain for any n below
about 6, due to (i) the pragmatic concept of the degrees of freedom (esp. correction factor f) and (ii)
to the fact that the underlying Taylor-series development is limited to the first degree, thus less
intended for large uncertainties. Therefore, an alternative mathematical approach is introduced in
the next chapter to further prove the revealed curvature.
2.3.2 The Multidimensional Confidence Interval
To further validate the curvature of the adjustment of SMART limits with respect to small sample
sizes, a second approach has been derived. This alternative theory extends the CI of a single
measure to a common CI of a series of n measures, while keeping the overall confidence level
constant (at, e.g., 95%). It will be denoted as the Multi-Dimensional Confidence Interval (MDCI).
The approach requires two general assumptions: (i) the total measuring uncertainty is purely
normal-distributed around a constant mean and (ii) all consecutively measured results are
uncorrelated (i.e., independent measures). The MDCI finally leads to the upper limit function L° of
the root mean square metric. Due to (i) the MDCI theory neglects the uncertainty and variability of
a bias; thus, it only covers the RMSD (resp. empirical standard deviation) metric.
The MDCI theory originates from the calculation of the two-sided CI of a normal-distributed and
standardized variable by integration of the Gaussian probability density (GPD) function. Applying
the known statistical parameters S (overall standard deviation) and δmean (mean bias), revealed by a
sufficiently large evaluation set of SMC values (see [14]), each measured SMC value can directly
be standardized without loss of information. The MDCI theory is therefore simplified to realizations
of the standard Gaussian distribution (RMSD(n→∞)=1).
The combined probability of n independent events (occuring sequentially or in-concert/multivariate)
is the product of the single-event probabilities P(1,2,...,n)=p 1·p2·...·pn. If the single p-values are
                                                                    8 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                   perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
extended to integrals over one-dimensional GPD distributions, the combined probability P leads to
an n-dimensional GPD distribution. Thus, the total probability of a particular sequence of n
standardized control measures can be expressed by this n-dimensional GPD distribution, where
each dimension represents one control measure of the SMC sample series. Any n-dimensional GPD
distribution is rotationally invariant around zero, and can therefore be expressed as a radial function.
Here, we are only interested in isolevel/equipotential spherical hypersurfaces within the spanned
space. This is for example the spherical partitioning surface of a certain common confidence limit
(z) represented by a constant radius. To obtain the (two-sided) 95% confidence limit z 95(n), the
normalized radial density function has to be integrated from 0 to z95(n)
                   ( 1− n2 )  z 95 ( n)
                 2                                        1 2
  P = 0.95 =
                       n
                             ⋅∫ r
                                         (n− 1)
                                                     (
                                               ⋅exp − r ⋅dr
                                                          2    )                                                                (11)
                  Γ  ()2
                                 0
(n: sample size or dimension; r: radius of the spherical hypersurface; Γ: Gamma function). Thus, the
radial integration limit z95(n) covers 95% of the hypervolume spanned by the multidimensional
GPD distribution. This slightly more advanced theory has been fully explained in [14], including a
complete derivation and validation of Eq. (11).
Obviously, z95 is 1.96 at n=1. For higher n, the limit z95(n) increases according to Eq. (11) and
slowly converges towards the square root function of n. According to [14], the limit z 95(n)
represents the Pythagorean addition of a series of single confidence limits ensuring a constant
overall significance level of 5%. The limit can therefore be utilized to obtain the maximum
acceptable RMSD (95% confidence) of a sequence of n realizations. To obtain such a function of
adequate upper RMSD limits L°(n) of n standardized values, z95(n) can directly be implemented
into Eq. (2) (with y0=0) leading to
                           n
                                              z (n)
  L ο
    RMSD   (n) =
                  √  1
                        ∑
                     n i=1
                              (y οi ) 2 = 95
                                                √n
                                                                                                                                 (12)
(° denotes the RMSD limit of N(0,1)-distributed samples). L°(n) goes from 1.96 (n=1) to 1 (for
n→∞) as drawn in Fig. 2A. The curvature of L°(n) is assumed to be directly comparable (except a
different scale) to the adaptation function a(λ,n) of SMART as defined in Eqs. (7) and (13). The
radial limit zp(n) is also equivalent to the square root of χ 2p(n). Relevant metrics (Γ(n/2) and pairs of
z(n), L°(n) for the 3 two-sided CI's 95%, 97,5%, and 99%) for all n≤40 are provided in [14].
2.4 SMART utilizing the limit of the expected long-term RMSTD
The “true” RMSTD, which emerges by a drastically extended sample size (n>>100), can be
revealed rather precisely by Eq. (2) and the simple evaluation method described in [14]. This
method evaluates the necessary parameters s and δ (together with a post-processing of data) with
high precision by a Gaussian fit of the overall histogram of multiple long SMC charts. Thus, the
maximum permissible statistical limit LΔ for a (hypothetically) very long SMC chart can be set
rather strict. Only a small additional amount (i.e., permissible bonus) is sufficient to provide a
robust definition of the general LΔ limit per analyte. Such a moderate bonus facilitates some
tolerance for heteroscedasticity or baseline drifts. This SMART variant, which adapts the given L Δ
to small SMC charts, is recommended due to the high reliability of large-scale statistics used to
                                                                     9 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
determine LΔ.
As further discussed in Chapter 3.1, the given mathematical analyses to approximate the expected
curvature of a(λ,n) lead to the following final equation of this SMART variant that refers to LΔ
          n
  √  1
       ⋅∑ ( y −y ) 2 ≤ a (λ , n)⋅L Δ
    n i=1 i 0
                                                     with
  a (λ , n)= 1 + (λ−1)⋅n−0.45 .                                                                                                  (13)
The adaptation function a(λ,n) modifies the long-term limit LΔ with regard to smaller and smaller
sample sizes n. It implicitly goes towards the higher limit LSMC at n=1. A proper general value for
the constant λ can be obtained from Eq. (6). To be valid for (almost) all analytes in clinical
chemistry, a λ value near the upper limit of the given uncertainty range of λ is recommended (i.e., λ
closely below 2.5).
2.5 SMART utilizing the limit dedicated for single measures (LSMC)
The SMART method can alternatively be provided with sole regard to the maximum permissible
limit LSMC intended for single measurements of control samples. Such limits are often the only
statutorily prescribed information in guidelines. For example, the limits given in the German
guideline (Rili-BAEK, table B1a-c column 3, in relative values [15]) can be considered as sole L SMC
data [16]. In contrast to the determination of LΔ, the definition of LSMC is usually done empirically at
a certain significance level and/or related to a fraction of the biological variation of the analyte
[20,21]. The determination of LSMC might also base on Eq. (4), where s eval and δeval could be revealed
by a Gaussian fit of the overall histogram of evaluation data. However, Eq. (4) yields too strict
limits in special cases (small imprecision but distinct inaccuracy). Depending on the technical
precision of the examined measuring process in relation to the medical needs (quantified by, e.g.,
the Sigma Metric [13]), a small addition could be permitted to its LSMC.
Running SMART, the applied limits decrease with higher considered sample sizes n from L SMC
(n=1) towards LΔ (n>>1). Here, LΔ is implicitly given by the constant λ according to Eq. (6). The
preliminary suggestion in [16] to apply a natural exponential function for a(n) was based on the
assumption that the uncertainty of the RMSTD at a sample size n=15 has already reached a value
near the long-term level with just a small remaining slope. However, one of the main new
conclusions, presented in Chapter 3.1, reveals that the remaining offset and slope are still very
significant at n=15 compared to n→∞. The curvature of a natural exponential function appears now
to be distinctly too steep in the range n=1-15 with the clear risk to cause false-positive limit
overruns at higher sample sizes.
The newly revealed functional dependency of a(λ,n) is strongly justified by the two presented
mathematical approaches (Chapter 2.3). The final equation of SMART utilizing L SMC and dedicated
to the range n=1-15 is given by
          n
                                 a (λ , n )
  √  1
       ⋅∑ (y i−y 0 ) 2 ≤
     n i =1                           λ ⋅LSMC            with
  a (λ , n)= 1 + (λ−1)⋅n
                                   −0.45
                                            .                                                                                    (14)
The choice of λ depends on how tolerant the given limit L SMC has been defined. Assuming a rather
                                                                 10 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
restrictive value of LSMC, λ should be chosen near its lower boundary given in Eq. (6) to prevent
false-positive results for (almost) all kinds of analytes (i.e., λ=1.8).
3 Results and discussion
3.1 The uncertainty of the RMSTD due to small sample sizes
In Chapter 2.3 and [14], two mathematical approaches were derived to quantify the increased
statistical uncertainty of RMSTD results at relatively small sample sizes. The quantification of this
uncertainty is important to optimally adapt the applied IQC limits for RMSTD results of short SMC
charts (especially for n<<50). The derived approaches are denoted as CI Δup (Chapter 2.3.1) and
MDCI (Chapter 2.3.2). The first approach refers to the entire RMSTD (inclusive bias); however, it
lacks precision below about n<6. The second approach (MDCI) represents a more fundamental
theory, but it neglects a systematic bias with respect to a target value (just RMSD). In the
comparable case of zero bias (ν=0 in Eq. (10)) and a CI of 95%, the final functions of both
approaches are in very good agreement as demonstrated in [14].
The most important conclusion regards to the functions of optimal RMSD/RMSTD limits
depending on the considered sample size. Figure 2 summarizes the revealed curves of both
mathematical approaches, which are (2A,2C) the standardized RMSD limit L°(n) of MDCI utilizing
Eq. (12) and (2B,2C) the relative RMSTD limit (LrelRMSTD) of CIΔup utilizing Eq. (10). The graphs 2A
and 2B represent a relatively moderate increase of the limits by using a CI of 95%, which is
recommended in combination with a small constant addition to the prescribed value of the IQC
limit LSMC or LΔ. The limit functions in 2C provide more tolerance due to a CI of 99%. Please note
that - along with the different CI’s - the type of error propagation of the CIΔup approach has also
been changed from maximum error propagation (CI-95%) to Gaussian error propagation (CI-99%).
The alternative equation of LrelRMSTD based on Gaussian error propagation can be found in the
appendix of [14]. In this study, LrelRMSTD has always been applied with the reference set ν=0.6 and
z95%=1.7 / z99%=2.4, suitable for common analytes in clinical chemistry (see Chapter 2.3.1 and [14]).
In Fig. 2B and 2C the intrinsic uncertainty of the CI Δup approach with regard to the concept of the
degrees of freedom of the χ2-term (discussed in [14]) is visualized by an upper and lower boundary
(gray corridor) flanking the expected shape of L relRMSTD. The upper boundary utilizes the given Eq.
(10), where the lower boundary represents Eq. (10) with a substitution of the term χ(n-1)2/(n-1) by
χn2/n.
The curves in Fig. 2 are fitted separately with the same fit function of the type F(n)=1+C·n─0.45 with
a best-matching scaling parameter C. All fits in Fig. 2 (red lines) clearly show that the curvatures of
the two different mathematical approaches are very similar. Only the amplitudes differ by up to
20% (at CI-95%), which can be dedicated to different basic assumptions. SMART uses an
alternative (independent) concept for scaling under consideration of the parameter λ (see Chapter
2.1). Thus, only the curvatures of the limit functions are relevant in this study. Nevertheless, the
recommended range for λ (1.8-2.5) agrees well with the (partially extrapolated) amplitudes at n=1
and CI-95% of both mathematical approaches. Fig. 2 confirms that the type of the fit function
F(n)=1+C·n─0.45 is very convincing. The exponent (-0.45) can be defined rather precisely. Curvatures
with exponents outside the range (-0.46,-0.43) are clearly less matching. An additional feature of
this fit function is the ensured, correct long-term limit of one. The function has been finally applied
as template for the adaptation function a(λ,n) of the SMART method (see Chapters 2.4 and 2.5). The
                                                                  11 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
fit function was optimized for the range n≤20. If an extended monitoring window of the SMART
method is intended (i.e., distinctly higher than n max=20), one might re-optimize the adaptation
function a(λ,n) by refitting Eqs. (10) and (12) with a variable exponent and over the extended range
of n. Although, the best fit to an extended MDCI-95% function (n=50) remains very similar:
1+0.986·n─0.452 with an R2=0.9981. (In the case of MDCI-99%, the best fit is 1+1.5855·n─0.479 with
R2=0.9997). The convincing consensus among both mathematical approaches and the well-
matching fit function provide a very reliable basis for the presented SMART method.
The second conclusion regards to the remaining distinct amount of statistical uncertainty in the
determination of root mean square metrics based on sample sizes up to about n=50. This uncertainty
needs to be considered in limit definitions applied to limited retrospective IQC data. At n=2 the
uncertainty (or error) in RMSTD determination can reach about 100% of the true RMSTD value
that is exactly obtainable by very large n only. The (hypothetical) large-scale limit L Δ can be chosen
close to this true RMSTD value. The findings also confirm the assumption that the upper limits of
RMSD/RMSTD results must increase at fewer n and finally culminate in the limit for single control
measures LSMC at n=1. According to Chapter 2.1, the ratio LSMC / LΔ of the maximally diverging
limits is defined in this study by λ, which lies in the range 1.8-2.5. The fit function F(n) and the
equivalent adaptation function a(λ,n) of SMART have been utilized to draw the course of optimal
intermediate limits between LSMC and LΔ.
The curvature of a(λ,n) or F(n) directly provides the relative amount of the statistical uncertainty at
any n by about
   a (λ , n)−a (λ ,∞)
                           ⋅100 % = n−0.45 ⋅100 % ,                                                                             (15)
   a (λ ,1)−a (λ ,∞)
where a(λ,∞)=1. Thus, 30% of the decrease of the adaptation function a(λ,n) from λ (at n=1)
towards 1 (for n→∞) still remains at n=15. In other words, the effective range between the
maximally diverging applied SMART limits (for n=1 resp. n=15) is just 70% of the entire value of
λ. Nevertheless, a monitoring window of n=15 seems to be an optimal trade-off to ensure a fast
response to suspicious IQC states. If a larger monitoring window of SMART is preferred, the
remaining statistical uncertainties at n=20 and n=30 would be 26% and 21.6%, respectively.
3.2 Final remarks on the SMART method
The novel SMART method is especially intended to monitor a limited available number of control
measures. However, the monitored window of most recent control measures should not be
significantly less than 15 values. During the initial phase, SMART can nevertheless be applied to a
smaller data set without modification. The method is most efficient utilizing control samples with
known target values. However, a feasible target value could also be self-determined during a pre-
analytical evaluation period.
Although the underlying mathematical approaches (Chapter 2.3) may appear complex, the SMART
method alone is straightforward. At each application, the SMART method evaluates up to 8 limit
tests of the RMSTD values of retrospective SMC charts with increasing considered numbers of
recent control measures. The applied limits of the RMSTD results become more and more strict,
facilitated by the increasing statistical significance of longer sample series. The limits converge
from the tolerant LSMC towards the stricter LΔ. Thus, SMART can even quickly respond to
suspicious shifts or trends of recent SMC values that are still within the ±LSMC limit around the
target value.
                                                                 12 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
One of the main advantages of SMART emerges from the feature that only one prescribed
maximum permissible limit per analyte is sufficient to realize the entire IQC - including a fast
detection of critical baseline trends as well as single critical outliers. This prescribed limit is either
LSMC or LΔ, whereas the undefined co-limit is implicitly considered by λ. Hence, the only other
necessary parameter is λ, which lies within the range 1.8-2.5 for (almost) all present analytes in
clinical chemistry (see Chapter 2.1). Please mention that a suitable choice of λ depends on the
preferred variant of SMART. A value of λ near the lower boundary (λ=1.8) is recommended for
SMART utilizing LSMC and near the upper boundary (λ=2.5) for SMART utilizing LΔ, respectively.
The design of the method provides a nuanced interpretation of outliers by alert levels. Thus, the
applied prescribed limit for an analyte can be chosen rather strict. It is, however, reasonable to grant
a small addition (“bonus”) to further account for some tolerance in the IQC procedure (i.e.,
permissible heteroscedasticity and baseline drift). The Sigma Metric [13] of the particular
measuring procedure may facilitate the decision on the quantity of this addition.
As explained in Chapter 2.2, the recommended number of limit tests is 8 for a monitoring window
of n=15 recent SMC values. This SMART plan would simultaneously evaluate 8 retrospective
sample series with sizes of n={1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15} (applied after each new SMC measure). In the
case of just 6 tests, recommended sample sizes of RMSTD tests would be n={1,3,6,9,12,15}
accordingly. In principle, a default number between 6 and 8 limit tests appears optimal. Test
frequencies outside this range may require modifications of the definitions of alert levels given in
the next chapter. SMART plans, which utilize a retrospective monitoring window of more than 20
SMC values and at least 8 limit tests, should benefit from the optional scoring scheme introduced in
Chapter 3.4.
SMART is highly recommended as the new default IQC procedure of the German Rili-BAEK. A
change would solve all of the distinct issues of the present mandatory IQC version as discussed in
[16]. Further, the current concept of an RA, which is solely applied at the ends of consecutive data-
collection periods of 1-3 months, would become obsolete. It would be replaced by the sliding
monitoring window of SMART.
3.3 The alert levels of SMART
The basic idea behind the definition of alert levels is that a moderate outlier usually breaks just one
limit, whereas one distinct outlier breaks multiple SMART limits at once. Particularly, the newest
SMC value will be considered in each of the applied limit tests; hence, it might solely cause
multiple limit overruns during one call of SMART. The extended monitoring of SMC data by
multiple limit tests thus allows a nuanced interpretation of outliers. In fact, sparse and moderate
overruns of limits are indeed “welcome” as early indicators, and the SMART limits can be defined
rather strict.
Moreover, SMART can detect and evaluate a sequence of recent SMC measures that are still below
the LSMC limit - but finally fail to meet one or more of the stricter subsequent limits. Nevertheless,
the first limit test (LSMC), just applied to the current measure, is generally most important, and it has
to be more prominently assessed than all other limit tests.
At the end of each call of SMART, the results of all limit tests are processed to reveal the present
alert state of the IQC. These alert states range from pre-failure warnings till critical alerts. Table 1
provides a suitable maximum number of 7 distinguishable state levels for an IQC using just one
control material. These gradual levels can be used to specifically define preventive actions and
detailed instructions for operators.
If two control samples are used and analyzed simultaneously, even more robust IQC state
evaluations of the monitored system are possible. Table 2 provides level definitions and suggested
                                                                 13 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
instructions for an IQC with two control samples and 6-8 limit tests.
If an alert level of 4 or higher was reached (and the causing problem has been solved), a restart of
SMART by rejecting of all previous SMC data becomes necessary. During the new initial phase one
might treat the missing retrospective SMC values within the monitoring window (default n max=15)
as being equal to the target value. To ensure an efficient IQC even at the very beginning, it is highly
recommended to start SMART with a predefined series of nmax-1 repeats of a better suited value
ydummy instead. An adequate value of ydummy is simply the sum of the target value and the strictest
limit, which is LΔ, thus ydummy=y0+LΔ or ydummy=y0+LSMC/λ.
How to deal with outliers? Outliers are important state indicators and statistical elements. They
should never be ignored even if the SMC measure was directly repeated. Anyway, if an outlier has
clearly been dedicated to an apparent exceptional mistake or a compromised control sample; this
particular outlier should be rejected. Further, in response to an outlier, the number of permitted
direct retries of an SMC has to be strictly limited to avoid repeated measures until a putatively
acceptable result is achieved. If nothing has really been changed on the system (except cleaning or
recalibration), just one direct repeat of an SMC is maximally permissible.
The optimal number of limit tests, the alert levels, and the suggested instructions were defined by
theoretical thinking. Own practical experience during long-term application may lead to further
optimizations of these settings.
3.4 An optional score for extended monitoring windows
In cases of monitoring windows considering more than about 20 most recent SMC values (N=n max,
N>20), it might become beneficial to additionally account for the recentness of a failed limit test.
This can be achieved by a weighting of limit tests in terms of topicality of the evaluated data. A
suitable weight wn is equal to the inverse square root of n, which is the sample size of a particular
RMSTD-limit test (with considered retrospective SMC values 1,...,n). The number of limit tests per
application of SMART should be at least 8.
The weights of failed limit tests yield a score. The score consists of two numbers due to the
extraordinarily prominent single-value limit test for n=1. The first (S n=1) is an integer, which
defaults to zero but increases by 1 for a failed test at n=1. The second score (S n>1) is the normalized
sum of the weights of all failed limit tests (except the first one at n=1):
                                                                               N
                                                                             ∑ wn
                                                                             n =2
  Score = Sn=1 ∣Sn >1 with Sn =1 ∈ { 0,1} and Sn>1 =                          N
                                                                                  1
                                                                            ∑
                                                                            n =2 √ n
                             n
   wn =
         √n
           1
                for
                     √  1
                           ∑
                        n i=1
                                (y i−y 0)2 > LSMART
                                                  n         ; else wn =0                                                        (16)
The score is also applicable and recommended for the parallel use of two control samples. Here, the
first score can reach two. Regarding S n>1, the weights of each control sample are summed up
separately; though, the weights of one control sample are considered to be negative (S n>1 with minus
sign). Table 3 provides suggested definitions of alert levels based on the scoring scheme for one of
the smallest SMART plans suitable for scoring.
                                                                 14 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
4 Conclusion
The study quantitatively revealed that a significant statistical uncertainty in the determination of
RMSTD or RMSD metrics must be considered, if the sample size (n) is below about 50. Thus,
applied statistical IQC limits need to be adapted according to the size of monitored data. A
transition curve of optimal IQC limits is given, which connects the maximum permissible limit for
single measures (n=1) with the RMSTD limit yielded by large-scale statistics (n→∞).
The findings led to the development of the novel SMART method intended for small monitoring
windows. The method manages the entire IQC with only one mandatory limit statement per analyte.
SMART can distinguish between up to 7 alert levels due to multiple limit tests. If a retrospective
monitoring window of more than 20 values is preferred, an optional weighting of failed single tests
can be applied to further improve the topicality of potential critical alert levels.
Research Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests: The author declares no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, conclusions, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
References
[1] S. Lester, K.E. Harr, M. Rishniw, P. Pion, Current quality assurance concepts and
         considerations for quality control of in-clinic biochemistry testing, J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
         242 (2013) 182-192. https://doi.org/10.2460/javma.242.2.182.
[2] D.C. Montgomery, Introduction to statistical quality control. seventh ed., Wiley Press, New
         York, 2012.
[3] A. Snoussi, M. el Ghourabi, M. Limam, On SPC for short run autocorrelated data. Commun.
         Stat. - Simul. Comput. 34 (2005) 219-234. https://doi.org/10.1081/SAC-200047110.
[4] W.H. Woodall, D.C. Montgomery, Research issues and ideas in statistical process control, J.
         Qual. Technol. 31 (1999) 376-386. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224065.1999.11979944.
[5] R.J. Howarth, Quality control charting for the analytical laboratory part 1: univariate methods,
         Analyst 120 (1995) 1851-1873. https://doi.org/10.1039/an9952001851.
[6] Westgard Homepage, CLIA statements, https://www.westgard.com/clia-a-quality.htm
         (accessed March 2020).
[7] T. Wang, S. Huang. An adaptive multivariate CUSUM control chart for signaling a range of
         location shifts, Commun. Stat. - Theory Methods 45 (2016) 4673-4691.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/03610926.2014.927494.
[8] M. Riaz, N. Abbas, R.J.M.M. Does, Improving the performance of CUSUM charts, Qual.
         Reliab. Engng. Int. 27 (2011) 415-424. https://doi.org/10.1002/qre.1124.
[9] J.O. Westgard, T. Groth, T. Aronsson, C.-H. de Verdier, Combined Shewart-CUSUM control
         chart for improved quality control in clinical chemistry, Clin. Chem. 23 (1977) 1881-1887.
[10] A.S. Neubauer, The EWMA control chart: properties and comparison with other quality-
         control procedures by computer simulation, Clin. Chem. 43 (1997) 594-601.
         https://doi.org/10.1093/clinchem/43.4.594.
                                                                 15 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
[11] J.O. Westgard, Rules and multirules, http://www.westgard.com/westgard-rules-and-
         multirules.htm (accessed Mar 2020).
[12] S. Westgard, H. Bayat, J.O. Westgard, Analytical sigma metrics: a review of six sigma
         implementation tools for medical laboratories, Biochem. Med. (Zagreb) 28 (2018) 1-12.
         https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2018.020502.
[13] Six        sigma-based                quality        control,        Learning        guide,       Abbott       Diagnostics,
         https://www.corelaboratory.abbott/sal/learningGuide/
         ADD-00058819_Six_Sigma_Learning_Guide.pdf (accessed Mar 2020).
[14] C. Beier, Impact of small sample sizes to the internal quality control: statistical uncertainties in
         the determination of root mean square deviations with respect to the sample mean (RMSD)
         or to a target value (RMSTD), medRxiv (submission expected in Oct 2020).
[15] Revision of the “Guideline of the German Medical Association on Quality Assurance in
         Medical Laboratory Examinations – Rili-BAEK” (unauthorized translation), J. Lab. Med. 39
         (2015) 26-69. https://doi.org/10.1515/labmed-2014-0046.
[16] C. Beier, Recommended changes of the current version of the German Rili-BAEK, J. Lab.
         Med. 43 (2019) 225-233. https://doi.org/10.1515/labmed-2019-0097.
[17] Richtlinie            der        Bundesärztekammer               zur      Qualitätssicherung          labormedizinischer
         Untersuchungen, Dt. Aerzteblatt 100 (2003) A3335-A3338.
[18] Desirable                      Biological                   Variation                Database                specifications,
         https://www.westgard.com/biodatabase1.htm (accessed Jan 2019).
[19] EFLM, https://biologicalvariation.eu/bv_specifications/measurand (accessed May 2019).
[20] S.S. Biswas, M. Bindra, V. Jain, P. Gokhale, Evaluation of imprecision, bias and total error of
         clinical chemistry analysers, Ind. J. Clin. Biochem. 30 (2015) 104-108.
         https://doi.org/10.1007/s12291-014-0448-y.
[21] C.G. Fraser, Biological variation: from principles to practice, AACC Press, Washington DC,
         2001, 1-151.
                                                                 16 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Table 1: Alert levels of SMART
Level Indication                                      Description
0          In control                                 No violation of limits
1          Trend warning                              Up to two limit violations except at n=1
2          Suspicious measure                         Outlier at n=1 but no other limit violation
3          Problematic measure                        Outlier at n=1 and one further violation
4          Statistically out-of-control               More than two limit violations except at n=1
5          Fully out-of-control                       Outlier at n=1 and at least two further violations
6          Deprecate lot/device                       Exceeding a given maximum permissible number of level-4
                                                      or level-5 events within last, e.g., 100 days of operation
                                                                 17 / 22

Table 2: Level definitions and suggested instructions for an IQC with two simultaneously used control samples (CS)
Level Condition                                                Suggested instructions
0       No violations of limits                                Proceed
1       Only one CS with an outlier at n=1 and no other Visual inspections of devices, utilities, and CS
        violations (single warning)
1       Up to two limit violations except at n=1 of one or Exchange of CS and probably other expendable items; extended backup storage of
        both CS (trend warning)                                measured patient samples (if reasonable)
2       Only one CS with an outlier at n=1 and up to one Educated visual and logged inspections; new CS aliquot; repeat of SMC; further
        other violation in each CS                             actions might be analyt-specific according to medical relevance, etc.
3       Both CS with an outlier at n=1 and up to one further Educated visual and logged inspections; cleaning; recalibration; new CS aliquots;
        violation in each CS                                   repeat of both SMC
4       Both CS with more than two limit violations each; Detailed inspection including dis-/reassembly and cleaning of units; exchange of CS
        but no outliers at n=1                                 and reagents; replacement of exchangeable items or preventive maintenance;
                                                               recalibration and repeat of both SMC; (inspection of all utility devices; contact lot
                                                               manufacturer)
5       An outlier at n=1 in combination with at least two Detailed inspection including dis-/reassembly and cleaning of units; exchange of CS
        further limit violations of one or both CS             and reagents; replacement of exchangeable units or preventive maintenance;
                                                               recalibration and repeat of both SMC; (inspection of all utility devices; contact lot
                                                               manufacturer)
6       Exceeding a predefined maximum number of level-4 Reportable incident; re-evaluation of all performance metrics of the device/method
        or level-5 events within, e.g., 100 days of operation

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Table 3: Definitions of alert levels for two concurrently used control samples utilizing the optional
scoring scheme. The dedicated SMART plan is: n max=21 with 8 limit tests at
n={1,3,6,9,12,15,18,21}.
 Level                                          S(n=1)                                      S(n>1)
 0                                              0                                           0
 1                                              1                                           0
 1                                              0                                           [-0.3,0.3]
 2                                              1                                           [-0.24,0.24]
 3                                              2                                           [-0.24,0.24]
 4                                              0                                           <-0.3 or >0.3
 5                                              1 or 2                                      <-0.24 or >0.24
 6                                              see Table 2                                 see Table 2
The suggested ranges are approximately consistent with the “condition” statements given in Table
2. The value 0.24 is slightly below the normalized weight of the second test (n=3), whereas 0.3 has
been set to be slightly smaller than the normalized sum of the three smallest test weights
(for n={15,18,21}).
                                                                 19 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Figure 1: Common relations between maximum permissible bias δmax and standard deviation smax in
clinical chemistry are utilized to approximate a general value of λ. (A) Frequency histograms of
ratios φ=δmax/smax of medical analytes taken from Ricos et al. 2014 (light gray, 150 entries,
mean=1.1) and the German Rili-BAEK 2003 (dark gray, 90 entries, mean=1.34) (see Chapter 2.1).
Histogram sampling and statistics were done in log10 space. (B) Functional relations between λ and
φ for 2 different κ according to Eq. (5). Related one-sided CI’s are given in parenthesis. The ratios φ
are presented on a log10 scale.
                                                                 20 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
Figure 2: The graphs show the relative increase of the statistical uncertainty to determine a reliable
value of RMSTD/RMSD based on small sample sizes n. All presented functions converge to 1 at
n→∞. (A) The graph is related to the MDCI theory at a confidence interval of 95% (black line).
(B,C) The black functions represent the statistical uncertainty of the RMSTD metric given by the
CIΔup approach with ν=0.6. The CIΔup approach becomes itself inherently uncertain at very small
                                                                 21 / 22

 medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.08.20209288.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
 preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
                                                                perpetuity.
                                     It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
sample sizes n<6, indicated by gray corridors and explained in [14] and Chapter 3.1. Further, a
value for n=1 is not defined by the CI Δup approach. Thus, the dashed lines mark extrapolations by
multi-parametric fits of the boundaries of the corridors. The corridors in (B) and (C) differ in the
related confidence interval and the type of error propagation: (B) 95%, maximum error propagation;
(C) 99%, Gaussian error propagation (see Chapter 3.1). Graph (C) also includes the MDCI function
at CI-99% indicated by green dots. A best-matching function with same curvature (n ─0.45) is aligned
to all graphs (red lines). This type of function is used in the SMART method.
                                                                 22 / 22
