medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    Evaluating the Sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 Infection Rates on
    College Campuses to Wastewater Surveillance
    Tony E. Wong1*, George M. Thurston2, Nathaniel Barlow1, Nathan Cahill1, Lucia Carichino1,
    Kara Maki1, David Ross1, Jennifer Schneider3,4
    1
      School of Mathematical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York,
    United States of America
    2
      School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York,
    United States of America
    3
      Applied Critical Thinking & Collaboratory for Resiliency & Recovery, Rochester Institute of
    Technology, Rochester, New York, United States of America
    4
      Department of Civil Engineering Technology, Environmental Management & Safety, Rochester
    Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, United States of America
    *Corresponding author
    Email: aewsma@rit.edu
    Abstract
              As college campuses reopen, we are in the midst of a large-scale experiment on the
    efficacy of various strategies to contain the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Traditional individual
    surveillance testing via nasal swabs and/or saliva is among the measures that colleges are
    pursuing to reduce the spread of the virus on campus. Additionally, some colleges are testing
    wastewater on their campuses for signs of infection, which can provide an early warning signal
    for campuses to locate COVID-positive individuals. However, a representation of wastewater
    surveillance has not yet been incorporated into epidemiological models for college campuses,
    nor has the efficacy of wastewater screening been evaluated relative to traditional individual
    surveillance testing, within the structure of these models. Here, we implement a new model
    component for wastewater surveillance within an established epidemiological model for college
    campuses. We use a hypothetical residential university to evaluate the efficacy of wastewater
    surveillance to maintain low infection rates. We find that wastewater sampling with a 1-day lag
    to initiate individual screening tests, plus completing the subsequent tests within a 4-day period
    can keep overall infections within 5% of the infection rates seen with traditional individual
    surveillance testing. Our results also indicate that wastewater surveillance can be an effective
    way to dramatically reduce the number of false positive cases by identifying subpopulations for
    surveillance testing where infectious individuals are more likely to be found. Through a Monte
    Carlo risk analysis, we find that surveillance testing that relies solely on wastewater sampling
    can be fragile against scenarios with high viral reproductive numbers and high rates of infection
    of campus community members by outside sources. These results point to the practical
    importance of additional surveillance measures to limit the spread of the virus on campus and
    the necessity of a proactive response to the initial signs of outbreak.
    Author Summary
              College campuses have employed a variety of measures to keep their communities safe
    amid the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Many colleges are implementing surveillance testing
    programs wherein students are randomly selected to be tested for SARS-CoV-2. These
    strategies aim to manage the number of infections among the student population by isolating
                                                                         1 by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    infected individuals. Some colleges are monitoring wastewater on their campuses for signs of
    the virus, which has been found to be capable of detecting viral RNA. If a wastewater sample
    shows signs of viral RNA, then screening tests are administered to the individuals who live or
    work in the buildings that contribute to the sewer in question. We present a model for such
    wastewater surveillance within a larger model for the spread of SARS-CoV-2 on a college
    campus. We show that wastewater surveillance can reduce the number of false positive cases
    and the associated disruptions to student life, while maintaining similar overall numbers of
    infections. However, we find that surveillance testing strategies that rely solely on wastewater
    sampling may be less effective if the local transmission rate of the virus is high, or if the rate of
    infection of members of the campus community by outside sources is high.
    1 Introduction
              As colleges put into action their reopening plans for Fall 2020, a natural experiment in
    epidemic management is unfolding. This experiment is stress-testing colleges’ strategies for
    reducing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 on their campuses. These strategies include reducing the
    capacities of classrooms and residence halls, mandating the use of face masks, implementing
    extensive sanitization and cleaning protocols between classes, putting in place social distancing
    requirements, and banning large gatherings. Additionally, many colleges are using traditional
    individual screenings to test students for the virus [1–3] at periodic intervals or by random
    sampling throughout the fall term. Previous work has found that this type of surveillance testing
    is critical for controlling the spread of virus on campus [4–6], and that surveillance testing the
    campus population every 2-10 days is a minimum requirement to keep the overall number of
    infections manageable.
              Such frequent screenings of all of a university’s students places a high financial and
    logistical burden on universities, as well as an intrusion on the lives and comfort of students. As
    an alternative or supplementary form of viral surveillance, many municipalities and universities
    are turning to collecting and testing wastewater from their campuses for signs of viral ribonucleic
    acid (RNA) [7]. Viral presence in wastewater can be a leading indicator for positive cases in
    traditional individual screening tests [8–10]. In this approach, wastewater is collected at sewer
    locations around campus and tested in a laboratory, typically by a testing method that
    incorporates a polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) assay [11]. If the wastewater sample from a
    particular sewer shows signs of viral presence, then the individuals in the building(s) that the
    wastewater sampling location serves can be given traditional individual screening tests for
    SARS-CoV-2. In this way, wastewater surveillance can be an effective tool to reduce the overall
    number of randomized screening tests required in order to maintain low infection rates.
    However, the epidemiological models used to inform college campus reopening strategies do
    not yet include a representation of wastewater surveillance. In this work, we present a
    wastewater module for the susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered (SEIR) model of Paltiel et
    al. [4].
              The SEIR modeling approach [12] employs a type of compartment model, wherein all
    individuals are assumed to be in one of four general categories: susceptible to infection,
    exposed (but not yet infectious or symptomatic), infected (either symptomatic or asymptomatic),
    and removed/recovered (recovered from the infection or deceased) [13]. These models do not
    track individual persons (i.e., are not agent-based), and as such SEIR models are simple and
    stylized in their representation of persons and processes. However, this simplicity leads to high
    computational efficiency, making SEIR models ideal for the large numbers of model simulations
    required for uncertainty and sensitivity analyses, and for informing decision-making to manage
    campus community health under uncertain conditions. Such decision support is critical when
                                                                       2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    campus officials must manipulate decision levers including the rate at which to administer
    screening tests to the campus population and what share of courses should be held on-campus
    versus online. Previous efforts to account for the sensitivity of projected infection rates have
    focused on simple Monte Carlo sensitivity analyses, wherein each parameter is sampled from a
    probability distribution and the effects of these changes on the infection rates is compared (e.g.,
    5). These foundational approaches assess the sensitivity of infection counts to uncertainties in
    model parameters, which represent real, on-the-ground uncertainties. However, previous work
    provides a largely qualitative view of these sensitivities; a formal global sensitivity analysis is still
    needed. Such a global analysis would quantify how the variation in infection rates is attributable
    to each uncertain model parameter and potential decision lever, including, for example, the viral
    reproduction rate and the rate at which screening tests are administered to the campus
    population.
              Here, we address these issues by assigning marginal prior probability distributions to
    each uncertain model input parameter. We sample from these prior distributions to examine the
    sensitivity of infection rate to uncertainty in the model parameters. By considering changes in
    these parameters in combination, we conduct a formal global sensitivity analysis to attribute the
    variance in the total number of infections to variation in each of the input parameters (including
    decision levers) and interactions among the parameters. We use a previously published SEIR
    model to incorporate a model component to represent wastewater surveillance testing. We use
    our new model to assess the ability of a wastewater surveillance system to prevent numbers of
    infections from exceeding a desired maximum. We examine the vulnerability of a wastewater
    surveillance system to failures in underlying assumptions, including increases in the viral
    reproductive rate, larger numbers of new infections of campus members from outside sources,
    and higher rates of noncompliance with quarantine procedures.
    2 Methods
    2.1 SEIR model
              Our model is a modified version of the SEIR model of Paltiel et al. [4]. The interested
    reader is referred to that work for a more detailed description of their original model, but we
    provide an overview here for convenience. The original model code is based on the source
    code provided accompanying the online dashboard for running simulations using the model of
    Paltiel et al. ([14]; https://data-viz.it.wisc.edu/covid-19-screening/). The model parameters
    discussed below are summarized in Table 1.
              The overall campus population is divided into three groups. The first group contains
    individuals who are circulating on campus and are capable of becoming infected by others, or
    capable of infecting others. This includes individuals who are uninfected and susceptible (U),
    those who have been exposed to an infectious individual but are not symptomatic and not
    infectious (E), and those who have been infected and are asymptomatic but infectious (A). The
    second group contains individuals who are in quarantine/isolation, including those who have
    been tested and received either a false or true positive result (FP and TP, respectively) and
    those who are symptomatic (S). The third group contains individuals who have been removed
    from the pool of potentially infected/infectious persons, including those who have been infected
    but have since recovered (R) and those who were infected and later died (D). The model tracks
    the total number of individuals in each of these model compartments, but not the individuals
    themselves. Fig 1 provides a schematic of these model components and the exchanges of
                                                                       3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    individuals between them. We assume that the overall size of the campus population is 12,500
    individuals, and that initially A(0)=10 of them are asymptomatic and infectious.
              Susceptible individuals (U) become exposed (E) at a rate determined by the effective
    viral reproduction rate (Rt) and the overall prevalence of asymptomatic infectious individuals (A)
    in the circulating group. We take Rt as an uncertain input parameter, with a default value of 1.1,
    which (as of this writing) is appropriate for Upstate New York where our home institution is
    located [15,16]. We consider uncertainty in Rt and the impacts of incorrect assumptions about
    the value of this key parameter in the sensitivity and risk analyses described in Sections 2.3 and
    2.4. Susceptible individuals (U) also become exposed due to exogenous shocks, such as
    infections of campus community members by outside individuals or “superspreader” events. The
    time between exogenous shocks (Texo) and number of new exposures from each shock (Nexo)
    are both taken as uncertain input parameters (see Table 1). Exposed individuals (E) become
    infectious and transition into the asymptomatic and infectious (but still circulating on campus)
    group (A) at a rate governed by the incubation period, Tinc. We take Tinc=5 days as a default
    value [4,17], but also consider uncertainty in this parameter in our subsequent analyses.
              We assume that asymptomatic infectious individuals (A) develop symptoms at rate σ
    (transition to S), and individuals who are infectious recover at a rate ρ (transition to R),
    regardless of whether or not they exhibit symptoms. Following Paltiel et al. [4], we assume that
    the percentage of infected individuals that eventually develop symptoms (psymptoms) is 30%.
    Thus, psymptoms=0.3=σ/(σ+ρ). Letting Trec be the recovery time from the infection, then ρ=1/Trec.
    We take Trec=14 days as a default parameter value, which leads to σ=3/98 days-1 as a default.
    Individuals who are symptomatic perish at rate δ, which depends on the recovery rate (ρ) and
    the symptomatic case fatality ratio, ffatal. We take ffatal=0.05% as a default value. We note that
    values for this parameter are likely to be higher for certain subpopulations of the campus
    population (for example, groups designated as high-risk by the United States Centers for
    Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [18,19]. We assume that recovered individuals (R) are
    no longer susceptible to infection. As our model simulations are for a single semester (about 14
    weeks), this is in line with the current thinking on the length of protection offered by SARS-CoV-
    2 antibodies [20,21].
              Traditional individual surveillance testing is carried out with period Ts so that the entire
    circulating campus population is screening once every Ts days. Note that the Ts parameter
    represents how long it would take to test the entire campus population, but this testing is divided
    up so that some portion occurs in each model time step. The screening test sensitivity (Se, true
    positive rate) and specificity (Sp, true negative rate) are taken as uncertain input parameters.
    We take Se=70% and Sp=98% (false negative and false positive rates of 30% and 2%,
    respectively) as default values, together with the prior distributions described below. Following
    the original work of Paltiel et al. [4], we assume that false positives are detected via a
    confirmatory test afterward with 100% specificity. The time to return a false positive to the
    susceptible circulating group is an input parameter that we take to be 1 day as a default. Also
    following Paltiel et al. [4], testing of exposed, but not infectious or symptomatic, individuals (E) is
    assumed to always lead to a negative screening result. This assumption is made in light of the
    practical difficulty involved in tracking how long each member of the exposed group has spent in
    that model compartment, as the proportions of false positives and false negatives are affected
    by the prevalence of viral RNA in the affected individuals. Additionally, as screening tests are
    carried out, some of the exposed individuals will transition into the asymptomatic (infectious)
    compartment, where they will potentially be screened as true positives.
                                                                       4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
              In the original formulation of Paltiel et al. [4], it is assumed that individuals who develop
    symptoms or receive a positive screening test result immediately are moved into
    isolation/quarantine. We have added a parameter to represent noncompliance with
    isolation/quarantine procedures. This parameter, fnc, is a fraction between 0 and 1 that
    represents the proportion of the asymptomatic and circulating population that does not go into
    quarantine even after either developing symptoms or testing positive for SARS-CoV-2. fnc can
    also represent the event that an individual develops symptoms but those symptoms are so mild
    that they do not realize they are infected. We take this parameter to be equal to 0 by default.
    However, in light of recent news of student noncompliance with quarantine/isolation procedures
    [22–24], it is important to evaluate the impacts of student noncompliance on the efficacy of
    campus strategies to manage the spread of SARS-CoV-2. We note that fnc only represents
    noncompliance with quarantine/isolation rules, and does not represent noncompliance with
    limitations on large gatherings or mask-wearing, for example. Restrictions on gathering sizes
    and mask mandates are represented in the effective reproductive rate, Rt.
    Figure 1. Model schematic with “fluxes” of individuals between model compartments. This
    includes potential noncompliance with quarantine/isolation procedures and the new wastewater
    fluxes based on screenings triggered by wastewater-positive results. Noncompliance reduces
    the flow of Asymptomatic individuals into the True Positive or Symptomatic compartments. Note
    that Recovered individuals are still circulating on campus, but are assumed to have been
    removed from the set of individuals who can become infected or transmit the virus.
    2.2 Wastewater sampling
    2.2.1 Overview
              We begin with a brief overview of the wastewater module that we have added to the
    SEIR model of Paltiel et al. [4]. Then, in Section 2.2.2, we provide specific details regarding the
    implementation in the model structure.
              Wastewater from a handful of different sewer sites around campus is tested for signs of
    SARS-CoV-2 every few days. In the real world, if there are signs that the virus is present in one
                                                                       5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    or more of these wastewater sampling locations, then the relevant wastewater sample is
    considered to be “positive” and screening tests will be administered to the subpopulations on
    campus that would have contributed to those wastewater samples. The limit of detection will
    vary between campuses and the specific wastewater collection and testing systems employed
    [25]. In our model, a positive wastewater sample is triggered when the number of asymptomatic
    or exposed (but not yet infectious) individuals who contribute to the wastewater samples
    exceeds a threshold parameter.
    2.2.2 Specific implementation
              We assume that a set of wastewater samples is drawn from sewer systems around
    campus and sent to a laboratory for testing every at regular intervals, Tww. We assume that
    wastewater sample results return from the laboratory every Tww days as well. Thus, at time
    t=n⨉Tww, the wastewater results from time t=(n-1)⨉Tww return from the laboratory, where n is a
    positive integer. As a default parameter value, we take Tww=3 days. We assume that a
    proportion, fww, of the overall population is contributing to wastewater samples, and that the
    population is well-mixed. This subpopulation consists of students who live on campus, and
    students, faculty, and staff who work or study on campus. A positive wastewater sample result
    is returned in the model if the number of asymptomatic and exposed individuals contributing to
    the wastewater samples at the time that the wastewater sample is drawn exceeds a threshold
    parameter, W (i.e., wastewater sample is found to indicate the presence of viral RNA). Based on
    results from University of Arizona [26] and preliminary analyses at our home institution, we take
    W=2 as a default value. We include uncertainty in W in the sensitivity and risk analyses
    described in Sections 2.3 and 2.4.
              For every college campus that is implementing a wastewater surveillance system, the
    building(s) that each sewage sample represents will be different. Thus, if there is evidence of
    viral RNA found in the wastewater sample from a particular sewer draw, it is unknown exactly
    how many individuals contributed to that particular sample. In light of this uncertainty, we use a
    parameter, Nbuilding, as a representative number of individuals that would contribute to an
    arbitrary wastewater sample. This can represent a single large residence hall or a collection of
    several smaller buildings. Uncertainty in Nbuilding also arises from the fact that different sewers
    from which a campus might sample will represent (collections of) buildings of different
    capacities, and multiple sewers can yield positive results simultaneously. We use a default
    value of Nbuilding=750 persons. 750 is toward the upper end of the range of building capacities for
    our home institution. If a positive wastewater signal leads to the testing of, on average, fewer
    than Nbuilding individuals, then choosing higher values for Nbuilding reflects the belief that
    sometimes multiple sewer systems will give positive wastewater results simultaneously.
              We assume that the wastewater-triggered individual screening tests begin some time,
    Tlag, after receiving the positive wastewater result. By default, we take Tlag=1 day. There are
    practical reasons to potentially delay initiating screening tests after a positive wastewater result.
    For example, a large portion of the exposed individuals who are not yet infectious might go
    undetected if screening tests are administered before they have transitioned into the
    asymptomatic (and infectious) model compartment.
              Each time that a wastewater sample is returned from testing (i.e., at intervals of Tww), the
    model checks if the wastewater result is positive. If a positive wastewater result occurs and
    screening tests begin, then we assume that all fww⨉(E(t)+A(t)) exposed and asymptomatic
    individuals contributing to wastewater sampling reside within the same representative building
    (or set of buildings) of size Nbuilding. It is important to note that this might represent a collection of
                                                                       6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    actual buildings; hence, our choice to use a value for Nbuilding that is toward the upper end of the
    set of values for our campus. Here, t represents the current day in the simulated semester
    (Tww+Tlag days since the wastewater sample in question was drawn), E(t) represents the number
    of exposed individuals at time t, and A(t) represents the number of asymptomatic individuals at
    time t. We assume that the remaining Nbuilding - fww⨉(E(t)+A(t)) individuals are divided between
    the susceptible (U(t)) and recovered (R(t)) groups. The relative proportions of this remaining
    building subpopulation that are susceptible and recovered are the same as those proportions in
    the general campus population. Following the original implementation of Paltiel et al. [4], we
    assume that the exposed group (E(t)) will always yield a true negative result when tested for
    SARS-CoV-2, but they can contribute to a positive wastewater signal [9,25].
              The time required to administer tests and receive results for the size Nbuilding
    subpopulation that contributes to the wastewater samples is Ts,ww. As a default, we assume that
    all individuals contributing to a positive wastewater result will be screened within Ts,ww=4 days.
    Similarly to our modification of the traditional individual surveillance testing, the false and true
    positive results from the wastewater-based screenings are modulated by a noncompliant
    proportion parameter, fnc. After wastewater-triggered individual screening tests remove detected
    infections from the wastewater-contributing subpopulation, the relative proportions of
    asymptomatic individuals in the wastewater-contributing subpopulation can be lower than the
    proportion among the general campus population. Our assumption of a well-mixed general
    population means that asymptomatic cases from outside the wastewater-contributing population
    will redistribute into the wastewater-contributing population. This may be viewed as the advent
    of a new outbreak in a different set of buildings than the set that was just administered the
    screening tests. An agent-based model would offer an opportunity to investigate these dynamics
    further, but is beyond the scope of the present work.
    2.3 Sensitivity analysis
              We use the Sobol’ method for global sensitivity analysis [27] to evaluate the sensitivity of
    our model to each of its input parameters and their interactions with one another. Global
    sensitivity analyses are preferable to one-at-a-time sensitivity analyses in the sense that a one-
    at-a-time analysis risks missing important interactions among uncertain parameters. However,
    global analyses are more computationally expensive due to the larger number of effects to
    explore. Here, our simple SEIR model is sufficiently inexpensive that running hundreds of
    thousands of simulations is possible on a time-scale of hours, so a global sensitivity analysis is
    feasible.
              The Sobol’ method examines how the variance in a model output of interest changes
    when the model input parameters are all varied simultaneously. Via our Sobol’ analysis, we
    decompose the variance in the total cumulative number of infections over a 100-day semester
    into portions attributable to each input parameter, and to each parameter interaction. The
    portion of variance in the model output that is directly attributable to changes to an individual
    parameter is that parameter’s first-order sensitivity index. The second-order Sobol’ sensitivity
    indices are the proportions of variance in the model output that are attributable to pairs of model
    input parameters that are varied together. Higher-order indices may be computed as well, but
    are typically not presented due to challenges of visualization and the large number of possible
    three-parameter combinations (for our model, there are over 800 such triplets). However, we
    also compute the total sensitivity index for each parameter, which is the proportion of variance
    attributable to that parameter and all of its interactions with other parameters, including these
    higher-order interactions.
                                                                       7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
                                                                        Default
     Parameter name and symbol                                                         Prior distribution                 Units
                                                                        value
     population_size                                                    12,500         Fixed; 12,500                      persons
                                                                                       Bin(n=12,500,
     initial_infected                                                   10                                                persons
                                                                                       p=10/12,500)
     Effective reproductive rate, Rt                                    1.1            Tri(a=3, b=12, c=5)                -
     Fraction of population noncompliant with
                                                                        0.01           Tri(a=0, b=0.1, c=0.01)            -
     quarantine procedures, fnc
     New exposures per shock, Nexo                                      15             NBin(r=5, p=0.25)                  persons
     Time between exogenous shocks, Texo                                7              Bin(n=14, p=0.5)                   days
     Incubation period (days to infectious), Tinc                       5              Tri(a=3, b=12, c=5)                days
     Time to recovery, Trec                                             14             Tri(a=10, b=21, c=14)              days
     % advancing to symptoms, psymptoms                                 30             Tri(a=5, b=50, c=30)               %
                                                                                       Tri(a=0, b=0.01,
     Symptomatic case fatality ratio, ffatal                            0.0005                                            -
                                                                                       c=0.0005)
     Time for traditional individual screening tests,
                                                                        -              NBin(r=42, p=0.125)                days
     Ts
     Time for wastewater sample result, Tww                             3              DUnif(min=1, max=8)                days
     Fraction of population contributing to
                                                                        0.55           Tri(a=0.2, b=0.8, c=0.55) -
     wastewater, fww
     Lag time to initiate wastewater-triggered
                                                                        1              DUnif(min=1, max=5)                days
     individual screenings, Tlag
     Time for wastewater-triggered individual
                                                                        4              DUnif(min=1, max=7)                days
     screening tests, Ts,ww
     Wastewater positive detection threshold, W                         2              Tri(a=1, b=5, c=2)                 persons
     Building size for wastewater screenings,
                                                                        750            NBin(r=5, p=0.01)                  persons
     Nbuilding
     Screening test sensitivity, Se                                     0.7            Tri(a=0.7, b=0.9, c=0.8)           -
     Screening test specificity, Sp                                     0.98           Tri(a=0.95, b=1, c=0.98) -
     Time to return false positive                                      1              Fixed; 1 day                       days
    Table 1. Parameter names, symbols, units, default values for risk analysis, and prior
    distributions. “Tri” denotes a triangular distribution, which is defined by its range parameters (a
    and b) and their mode parameter (c). “Bin” denotes a binomial distribution, which is defined by a
    number of Bernoulli trials (n) and the probability of “success” of one of those trials (p). “NBin”
    denotes a negative binomial distribution, which is defined by a number of Bernoulli successes
    (r) and the probability of success (p). “DUnif” and “Unif” denote discrete uniform and continuous
    uniform distributions, respectively.
               We assign each model input parameter a marginal prior probability distribution (Table 1
    and Supplementary Material). We sample from these prior distributions to create two
    independent ensembles of 10,000 simulations using a Latin hypercube sampling approach [28].
    The Sobol’ method computes the parameters’ sensitivity indices by constructing new
    simulations by swapping values for each parameter, and combinations of parameters, from one
                                                                       8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    ensemble to the other. For example, the second-order sensitivity to Rt and Nexo would be
    computed by swapping all of the values for Rt and Nexo from the second ensemble into the first,
    and observing the change in model output variance from when all parameters were from the first
    ensemble. To estimate all of the first-order, second-order, and total sensitivity indices, a grand
    total of 380,000 model simulations are required. We use bootstrap resampling with 1,000
    replicates to compute 95% confidence intervals for each sensitivity index. We diagnose
    convergence when the widest confidence interval has a width that is less than 10% of the
    highest total sensitivity index (e.g., 29). We report only sensitivities that constitute at least 1% of
    the total variance in the modeled total cumulative number of infections, and whose 95%
    confidence interval excludes 0.
              In the sensitivity analysis, we assume our hypothetical campus pursues a testing
    strategy that relies primarily on wastewater surveillance, but is complemented with a small
    amount of traditional individual surveillance testing.
    2.4 Risk analysis
              Campus decision-makers would seek to optimize obvious objectives such as minimizing
    the total number of infections or minimizing the total number of screening tests needed. Public
    health mandates may also provide additional objectives that decision-makers aim to satisfy.
    Here, we consider the ability of our university to maintain fewer than 100 new infections across
    any 14-day period. This is the threshold beyond which universities in New York State would
    need to switch to all-online classes for at least two weeks [30]. We note that there are specific
    14-day periods in which infection counts are tabulated, but examine the objective of maintaining
    fewer than 100 new infections across any such period, as this will ensure that the state
    requirement is met. Additionally, we note that smaller institutions would need to close upon
    reaching a new infection count equal to 5% of their population, and that local health
    departments may elect to keep the institution closed for in-person classes longer as the
    situation demands. For brevity’s sake, for a given model simulation, we denote the maximum
    number of new infections across any 14-day window as Imax,14. While a testing strategy
    (wastewater and/or traditional individual surveillance) might satisfy the Imax,14<100 objective
    under nominal conditions (default parameter values), incorporating uncertainty in the model
    parameters by sampling from their prior distributions will lead to a corresponding distribution of
    Imax,14 values for the given testing strategy. We define the reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100 as
    the probability Pr(Imax,14<100). This probability, of course, is conditioned on the testing strategy
    as well as the underlying parameter prior distributions and other model structural assumptions.
    With these caveats in mind, we examine which wastewater testing strategies provide the
    highest reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100 infections.
              Guided by our hypothesis that uncertainty in model input parameters will diminish the
    ability of our hypothetical university to satisfy its objectives for containment of the SARS-CoV-2
    virus on campus, we conduct a Monte Carlo risk analysis. We consider surveillance testing
    strategies that involve only wastewater surveillance, as traditional surveillance testing (e.g.,
    nasal swabs and/or saliva tests) has been considered extensively elsewhere in the literature
    [4,5]. We consider testing strategies with a time lag to begin wastewater screenings after finding
    a positive result in the wastewater samples of Tlag=1 day. We consider times to complete all
    wastewater-triggered screening tests, which begin after the 1-day lag, of Ts,ww=1, 2, …, 7, or 8
    days. Preliminary experiments (see Supplemental Material) suggest that the lag time to initiate
    wastewater screenings did not substantially (>1%) affect the resulting infection rates. This is
                                                                       9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    because eventually, infections are so prevalent on campus that the wastewater-triggered
    screenings become a nearly continuous process.
              We evaluate the sensitivity of these eight testing strategies, corresponding to the eight
    values of Ts,ww above, to our assumptions about three critical parameters: the effective
    reproductive rate, Rt, the number of new infections from exogenous sources each week, Nexo,
    and the fraction of individuals who are not compliant with quarantine/isolation procedures, fnc.
    Specifically, we consider a control scenario in which we assume that Rt=1.1, Nexo=15 on a
    weekly time-scale (Texo=7 days), and fnc=0.01 (1%). In the risk analysis, we suppose that the
    hypothetical campus uses only wastewater-triggered individual testing and does not conduct
    any additional traditional individual testing (e.g., nasal swab or saliva). We let Ts,ww vary at its
    values stated above, we keep the parameters Tlag, Rt, Nexo, Texo, and fnc fixed, and we sample all
    of the other model parameters from their prior distributions (Table 1). We assume that the total
    campus population is fixed (12,500 individuals), and do not consider uncertainty in the time to
    return false positive results (1 day). We estimate the reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100,
    Pr(Imax,14<100), as the proportion of simulations in which the maximum number of new infections
    across any 14-day window does not exceed 100. For each testing strategy and combination of
    Rt, Nexo, and fnc, we generate 3,000 sets of the other parameters from their marginal prior
    distributions using a Latin Hypercube sampling approach [28]. We find that at least about 2,000
    samples are required in order to stabilize our estimates of Pr(Imax,14<100), subject to the
    uncertainties in the other model parameters (see Supplemental Material).
              We then consider how “breaking” our assumptions about the parameters Rt, Nexo, and fnc
    affects the reliability Pr(Imax,14<100). We construct seven additional ensembles by increasing Rt
    to 1.5, increasing the number of new exposures for each weekly shock to 30, and increasing the
    fraction of noncompliant individuals to fnc=0.1, as well as all combinations of these increases. By
    observing the decrease in Pr(Imax,14<100), we quantify the fragility of each testing time-scale to
    broken assumptions about the rate of viral transmission on campus, the influence of infections
    of campus community members by outside sources, and noncompliance by students.
              Importantly, in the simulations that we present here, there are two total infection counts.
    First, there is the number of true infections, including asymptomatic cases (A(t)), symptomatic
    (S(t)), and true positive cases (TP(t)). The number of true infections is generally unknown in real
    life. By contrast, our model also computes the number of perceived - or detected - infections.
    The number of perceived infections includes symptomatic cases (S(t)), true positives (TP(t)) and
    false positives (FP(t)), but misses asymptomatic cases. We thus present two sets of reliabilities:
    one using the true number of infections and one using the perceived infections only. This
    distinction, and the fact that in the “model world” the true number of infections is known, enables
    us to characterize how a lack of timely testing can obscure the true infection count. So, we
    hypothesize that as the testing time Ts,ww increases, the perceived reliability will increase, while
    the true reliability will decrease. However, we hypothesize that beyond a certain length of time
    for testing, the perceived reliability will begin to decrease because the number of symptomatic
    cases becomes overwhelming.
    3 Results
    3.1 Comparison with traditional individual surveillance testing
              Before embarking on our Monte Carlo sensitivity and risk analysis, we first examine
    individual simulations under the control scenario as described in Sec. 2.4. We use the default
                                                                       10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    parameter values from Table 1, including weekly 15-infection shocks (Texo=7 days, Nexo=15),
    Rt=1.1, and fnc=0.01 noncompliance. Using wastewater surveillance with Tlag=1 day and Ts,ww=4
    days leads to true numbers of infections that are quite similar to the infection count under a
    traditional surveillance testing regimen with Ts=7 days (Fig 2A, solid lines). The total cumulative
    numbers of infections under the wastewater and traditional surveillance approaches were 410
    and 399 infections, respectively, at the end of the 100-day model simulations. This difference
    constitutes an increase of 2.8% of the number of true infections under the traditional screening
    approach. Under the control scenario, the projected numbers of deaths for the semester are
    0.043 and 0.042 for the wastewater and traditional screening cases, respectively. These
    differences increase slightly in the moderate (Rt=1.5, Nexo=20, and fnc=0.05; Fig 2C) and severe
    (Rt=2, Nexo=30, and fnc=0.1; Fig 2E) scenarios. In the moderate scenario, there are 860 total
    infections (0.082 deaths) projected under the wastewater surveillance program and 828
    infections (0.079 deaths) under the traditional surveillance testing program. In the severe
    scenario, there are 3,825 infections (0.30 deaths) and 3,655 infections (0.29 deaths) using the
    wastewater and traditional surveillance approaches, respectively. The numbers of true
    infections when using wastewater surveillance constitute increases of 3.9% and 4.7% over the
    1-week traditional surveillance plan in the moderate and severe risk cases, respectively.
              While the numbers of true infections are similar, the numbers of perceived infections are
    quite different. Under the control scenario, our model predicts that using wastewater
    surveillance leads to a dramatic underestimation of the number of true infections: at the end of
    the semester, there are about 45 perceived infections and 66 true infections. This is the result of
    wastewater surveillance testing a sicker subpopulation resulting in many fewer false positive
    individuals than traditional surveillance testing (Fig 2B). Traditional surveillance overestimates
    the number of true infections under the control scenario (Fig 2A, green lines), but this
    overestimation is the result of a larger portion of false positive individuals and not from detecting
    more asymptomatic cases (Fig 2B). The sizable number of false positive cases ensnared by the
    traditional individual surveillance testing strategy can be understood by a quick heuristic
    calculation: out of a campus population of 12,500 individuals, 12,500/7≅1,786 of them are
    administered a test on the first day of the simulated semester. With a nominal false positive rate
    of 2% (1-specificity), we expect to see about 1,786⨉0.02≅36 false positive cases. This roughly
    matches the false positive census by day 20 seen in Fig 2B. However, using traditional
    surveillance in the moderate scenario initially overestimates the number of true infections, then
    at day 37, the number of true infections becomes larger than the number of perceived infections
    (Fig 2C, green lines), which thus underestimate the number of true infections after day 37. For
    the severe risk scenario, this switch occurs after only 15 days (Fig 2E). One of the reasons a
    campus might pursue a traditional surveillance testing approach is to err on the side of a Type 1
    error (false positive), when the potential drawbacks to missing positive COVID-19 cases are
    high (e.g., an outbreak). These results suggest that the utility of this traditional approach relies
    on the testing strategy being sufficiently aggressive as to match the local viral prevalence and
    spread.
                                                                       11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
                                          Current actual and                                       Breakdown of actual and
                                                 infection count                                           ed infections
                                               infections, wastewater surv.                    Symptomatic                    Actual
                          100       Actual infections, wastewater surv.              100       True positive     Trad.
                                               infections, traditional surv.                   Asymptomatic                             ed
                                                                                                                         WW
                          80        Actual infections, traditional surv.             80        False positive
       Control    Count   60                                                         60
                          40                                                         40
                          20                                                         20
                                                    Exogenous infections
                          0                                                          0
                                0    20        40         60        80         100         0       20       40      60        80       100
                                                    Day                                                          Day
                          150                                                        150
       Moderate   Count
                          100                                                        100
                          50                                                         50
                                                    Exogenous infections
                          0                                                          0
                                0    20        40         60        80         100         0       20       40      60        80       100
                                                    Day                                                          Day
                          800                                                        800
                          600                                                        600
       Severe     Count   400                                                        400
                          200                                                        200
                                                    Exogenous infections
                          0                                                          0
                                0    20        40         60        80         100         0       20       40      60        80       100
                                                    Day                                                          Day
     Figure 2. Wastewater surveillance (black lines) underestimates the true number of infections
     (solid lines), while traditional individual surveillance (green lines) tends to overestimate it for low-
     risk scenarios, then underestimate it for high-risk scenarios. Shown are the numbers of current
     infections at each time throughout the semester (A, C, and E) and the breakdown of those
     infections among the asymptomatic, symptomatic, true positive, and false positive model
     compartments (B, D, and F) at 20-day intervals. In the right column, the middle bars in each
     group represent the actual numbers of infections and the outside bars represent the perceived
     infections. The first two bars in each group represent traditional individual surveillance and the
                                                                               12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    last two bars represent wastewater surveillance. The nominal scenario (first row) uses the
    parameter values from Table 1, including Rt=1.1, Nexo=15, Texo=7 days, and fnc=0.01. The
    moderate risk scenario (second row) increases Rt to 1.5, increases Nexo to 20, and fnc=0.05,
    while all other parameters are the same as in the control scenario. The severe risk scenario
    (bottom row) uses Rt=2, Nexo=30, Texo=5 days, and fnc=0.1. The occurrences of exogenous
    infections (of size Nexo) are denoted with orange triangles in the first column. All of the
    wastewater screening cases use Tlag=1 day and Ts,ww=4 days, and all of the traditional individual
    screening cases use Ts=7 days (weekly screenings).
              The model prediction that wastewater surveillance does not result in a high portion of
    false positives is not surprising. The structure of our model assumes only a certain fraction of
    the campus population contributes to the wastewater samples (fww=0.55 is the nominal
    parameter value). Indeed, not all members of the campus community will be equally
    represented in wastewater samples. Wastewater surveillance enables the model to identify a
    subpopulation of sicker individuals and focus screening tests on this subpopulation. Of course,
    this also means that many individuals will not be within the group that is administered
    wastewater-triggered screening tests. In practice, wastewater sampling should be used in
    tandem with some traditional individual surveillance testing to address this issue. However,
    even in the moderate and severe scenarios, the number of overall infections is never more than
    5% higher when using wastewater-based surveillance testing as opposed to traditional
    individual surveillance testing (Fig 2C and 2E). Thus, it appears that for the scenarios
    considered here, the infections that wastewater sampling misses do not lead to large outbreaks
    of infections.
    3.2 Sensitivity analysis
              For the set of model input parameters and prior distributions chosen to reflect conditions
    with low rates of viral transmission and exogenous exposures, we find that nine parameters, out
    of 18 total, contribute significantly to variance in the overall number of infections (Fig 3). The
    criteria for “significance” is for the sensitivity index to be at least 1% of the total variance in
    estimated cumulative infections, and for the 95% confidence interval to exclude 0. The nine
    sensitive parameters, in order of their first-order sensitivity indices, are: the effective
    reproductive rate (Rt, 35%), the number of new exposures per exogenous shock (Nexo, 12%),
    the frequency of exogenous shocks (Texo, 6%), the fraction of the population contributing to
    wastewater samples (fww, 4%), the amount of time between wastewater sample results return
    (Tww, 4%), the amount of time for an infected individual to recover (Trec, 4%), the fraction of
    infected individuals who exhibit symptoms (psymptoms, 3%), the amount of time for an exposed
    individual to become infectious (Tinc, 3%), and the amount of time required to complete
    screening tests after a positive wastewater result (Ts,ww, 2%). We find a total sensitivity to Rt and
    its interactions with other parameters of 63%. This highlights the importance of practical
    measures to reduce Rt, including reduced classroom and residence hall capacities, limits on
    large gatherings, and mask mandates, for example.
                                                                       13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    Figure 3. To what degree do the individual and combined parameter uncertainties and decision
    levers influence the overall cumulative number of infections over the course of the simulated
    semester? This Sobol’ radial convergence diagram depicts the decomposition of variance in the
    total number of infections among the uncertain input parameters. Input parameter prior
    distributions have been chosen to represent the conditions and characteristics of the authors’
    home institution, which corresponds to a relatively low value of Rt, about 10-20 exogenous
    infections per week, and low rates of noncompliance. Filled orange nodes represent first-order
    sensitivity indices (direct parameter influences); the concentric gray nodes represent total
    sensitivity indices (the given parameter’s influence in combination with all other parameters);
    and filled gray bars represent second-order sensitivity indices for the interaction between the
    given pair of parameters. Parameters whose names or symbols are orange are the parameters
    to which the model is sensitive (in the upper hemisphere of the diagram); parameters in black
    (lower hemisphere) are those to which the model does not display a significant sensitivity.
              The fact that two out of the top three parameters to which the total infection count is
    most sensitive are related to infections of campus community members through interactions
    with external individuals (e.g., social events and interactions off-campus) highlights the
    importance of campus and municipal public health measures to limit the spread of the virus.
    This result also illustrates the practical impacts of members of the campus community making
    (or not making) safe and responsible choices. We emphasize that these results employ prior
    distributions for the model input parameters that have been chosen to reflect the conditions and
    characteristics of our home institution in Upstate New York. We include analogous sensitivity
    analyses for hypothetical scenarios at a larger university situated within a community with higher
                                                                       14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    rates of transmission and a smaller college with a much lower student population and less
    active interactions with its surrounding community (see Supplemental Material).
    3.3 Risk analysis
              We now turn to the question: How well can different wastewater surveillance strategies
    be expected to help maintain low rates of infection on campus? In light of the model’s
    sensitivities to Rt and Nexo, we examine the fragility of different wastewater surveillance
    strategies using hypothetical scenarios in which the values for those parameters, and the
    noncompliance parameter, fnc, are more severe than the default values from Table 1. We use a
    set of eight ensembles to examine the reliability of maintaining fewer than 100 infections during
    any 14-day period (Imax,14<100) under different policies for wastewater-triggered surveillance
    testing (Fig 4). All scenarios use a lag time to initiate screenings of Tlag=1 day. Rt, Nexo, and fnc
    are held fixed at either their nominal values (Rt=1.1, Nexo=15 new infections per week, and
    fnc=0.01 (1%) noncompliance) or their high-risk values (moderate/severe cases: Rt=1.5, Nexo=30,
    and fnc=0.1). We assume that no additional traditional individual screening tests beyond those
    triggered by wastewater sampling are performed, and all other model parameters are sampled
    from their prior distributions.
              Under nominal conditions, the reliability is about 89% when screenings are completed
    within 1 day (Ts,ww =1), excluding the 1-day lag time to initiate the screenings (Fig 4A). As the
    time to complete the screening tests increases, the perceived reliability increases to 100% (Fig
    4A, gray shading) while the actual reliability decreases to about 65% with a screening time of 8
    days (orange shading). That this discrepancy between the perceived and actual reliability as
    screening time increases can be seen in all of the higher-risk scenarios as well (Fig 4B-H). This
    demonstrates how failing to react in a timely fashion to signs of viral RNA can lead to the
    perception of safety, while in reality the infection count is growing. Additionally, even though
    both the control scenario and the high-noncompliance scenario yield perceived reliabilities of
    100% for screening times longer than 3 days (Fig 4A, C), higher rates of noncompliance lead to
    about 20-30 additional infections beyond the control scenario (see Supplemental Material).
              When Rt or Nexo are increased to their high-risk values, the actual reliability of
    maintaining Imax,14<100 is never greater than 50% (Fig 4B, D-H); the perceived reliability can be
    up to 76%, with a screening time of 5 days. This reveals the fragility of a surveillance testing
    strategy that relies on wastewater sampling. Scenarios in which both Rt=1.5 and Nexo=30 lead to
    outcomes in which even the perceived reliabilities do not exceed 20% (Fig 4F, H). For these
    scenarios, the actual reliability is 0% if the time to receive screening results is longer than 2
    days. This highlights the compound hazard associated with multiple drivers of risk on college
    campuses. Holiday parties, reuniting with friends after winter break, spending more time indoors
    during winter, and (at some universities) spring break can all serve to increase both Rt and Nexo.
    This means that these high-risk scenarios must be considered as possible, if not probable, real-
    world cases as colleges plan for their spring semesters.
                                                                       15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
                               Rt=1.1, fnc=0.01, Nexo=15                                  Rt=1.5, fnc=0.01, Nexo=15
                    1.0                                                       1.0        Using            infections only
                    0.8                                                       0.8        Using actual infections
      Reliability                                               Reliability
                    0.6                                                       0.6
                    0.4                                                       0.4
                    0.2                                                       0.2
                    0.0●                                                      0.0●
                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7      8                         1       2     3     4    5     6       7   8
                      Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)                   Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)
                               Rt=1.1, fnc=0.1, Nexo=15                                   Rt=1.1, fnc=0.01, Nexo=30
                    1.0                                                       1.0
                    0.8                                                       0.8
      Reliability                                               Reliability
                    0.6                                                       0.6
                    0.4                                                       0.4
                    0.2                                                       0.2
                    0.0
                      ●                                                       0.0●
                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7      8                         1       2     3     4    5     6       7   8
                      Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)                   Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)
                               Rt=1.5, fnc=0.1, Nexo=15                                    Rt=1.5, fnc=0.01, Nexo=30
                    1.0                                                       1.0
                    0.8                                                       0.8
      Reliability                                               Reliability
                    0.6                                                       0.6
                    0.4                                                       0.4
                    0.2                                                       0.2
                    0.0●                                                      0.0●
                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7      8                         1       2     3     4    5     6       7   8
                      Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)                   Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)
                               Rt=1.1, fnc=0.1, Nexo=30                                   Rt=1.5, fnc=0.1, Nexo=30
                    1.0                                                       1.0
                    0.8                                                       0.8
      Reliability                                               Reliability
                    0.6                                                       0.6
                    0.4                                                       0.4
                    0.2                                                       0.2
                    0.0
                      ●                                                       0.0●
                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7      8                         1       2     3     4    5     6       7   8
                      Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)                   Time to screening results, Ts,ww (days)
     Figure 4. Slower response times to complete screening tests based on wastewater sampling
     can lead to the perception of safety based on a high reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100 (gray
     bars) in contrast to a lower true reliability based on the actual numbers of infections (orange
     bars). Shown on the vertical axis is the reliability, Pr(Imax,14<100) and on the horizontal axis are
     the times required to complete subpopulation screening results after a one-day lag to initiate
     screening tests. The left bars give the reliability using the actual infection counts and the right
     bars give the reliability using only the perceived infections, which would hypothetically be
     known. The panel titles give the values for the reproductive rate (Rt), the noncompliant fraction
     (fnc), and the number of new exogenous infections each week (Nexo). Bold-face parameters in
     the panel titles denote parameters that have taken on values corresponding to higher-risk
     scenarios. All other parameters are sampled from their prior distributions given in Table 1.
                                                                                16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
              We find that across all scenarios, completing the wastewater-triggered screening tests
    within 1 day of initiating the tests maximizes the actual reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100.
    However, in addition to improving student health conditions by maximizing the actual reliability
    for Imax,14<100, campus decision-makers in our hypothetical situation would want to also
    maximize the perceived reliability (based on the perceived number of infections). We emphasize
    that in practice, the perceived number of infections is the only information known to decision-
    makers; the actual number of infections is information only known to us here in our model
    experimental setting. In all scenarios except those with higher Rt combined with higher Nexo, the
    perceived reliability is maximized by using a screening time of 4-5 days (Fig 4A-E, G). In the two
    scenarios with both higher Rt and higher Nexo, the perceived reliability is maximized by using a
    screening time of 2 days (Fig 4F, H). A time to receive screening results of 2 days appears to be
    a suitable compromise between (i) guarding against high-risk scenarios (i.e., higher Rt and Nexo
    simultaneously) and (ii) balancing minimizing true infections against the practical concern of
    minimizing the number of perceived (detected) infections.
    4 Discussion
              We have tuned a SEIR compartment model to represent scenarios of wastewater
    screening for SARS-CoV-2 at a hypothetical university of 12,500 students during a time period
    in which the area is experiencing relatively low viral presence and transmission, as well as low
    exposure of campus community members from the surrounding community. By developing and
    implementing a model component for wastewater surveillance, we find that wastewater
    surveillance testing can be an effective strategy to maintain a similar number of overall
    infections on campus to traditional individual surveillance testing (Fig 2). This result is
    conditioned on the assumed values and prior distributions for our parameters, which have been
    selected to represent situations that might plausibly face our home institution, and is conditioned
    on the campus health decision-makers responding to signs of infection in a timely manner.
              The discrepancy between the true infection count and the number of infections that
    campus health officials would know about (the perceived number of infections) is striking (Figs 2
    and 4). Guarding against the worst-case scenarios that include higher reproductive rate, Rt,
    simultaneous with higher exogenous infections, Nexo, suggests that a time to screening results
    of Ts,ww=2 days (plus a 1-day lag to initiate the screenings) is optimal for maximizing the
    perceived reliability of maintaining Imax,14<100 (Fig 4F, H). However, in the other higher-risk
    scenarios, the perceived reliability is maximized by taking Ts,ww=4 or 5 days (Fig 4A-E, G).
    Across all scenarios, the actual reliability is maximized by taking Ts,ww=1 day, the fastest time-to-
    results considered here. Thus, we suggest that a time of Ts,ww=2 days to complete wastewater-
    triggered screening tests balances decision-makers’ desire to avoid a strategy that is fragile
    against higher-than-nominal risk factors, to minimize the overall number of infections, and the
    practical importance of maintaining fewer than 100 perceived infections across any 14-day
    period (Fig 4).
              Exogenous infections and Rt are the parameters with the highest direct influence on
    overall number of infections (Fig 3). These results reflect the importance of taking practical
    steps to mitigate viral spread on campus and within the local community. Additionally, the fact
    that Rt and the frequency and rate of exogenous infections have a stronger influence on overall
    infection count than the characteristics of the surveillance testing protocol (wastewater or
    traditional) is likely attributable to the relatively low prevalence and spread of virus in our main
    test case. In a supplementary experiment, we change the parameters’ prior distributions to
    represent the case of a large university (20,000 individuals) in an area with higher rates of
                                                                       17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    transmission and exogenous shocks and a small college (3,000 individuals) in an area with low
    transmission and exogenous shocks (see Supplementary Material). In the large university case,
    we find that the characteristics of the surveillance testing protocol become more important than
    the frequency and rate of exogenous infections. The results for the small college case more
    closely resemble our results for the hypothetical campus of Sec 3.2, with the exception that
    exogenous infections contribute a relatively smaller portion to the variability in overall numbers
    of infections.
              While our sensitivity analysis and preliminary risk analysis (see Supplementary Material)
    may appear to indicate that the lag time to initiate screening tests based on a positive
    wastewater return is inconsequential for improving the reliability, the total number of infections
    suffers with greater lag times. Furthermore, in many simulations, the prevalence of the virus is
    high enough that once wastewater-based screening tests are initiated, they continue until the
    end of the semester (Fig 1). Thus, initiating screening tests within one day, in response to a
    positive wastewater signal, appears to be the best option to mitigate higher numbers of
    subsequent infections.
              We find that wastewater sampling leads to 410 infections over the course of the entire
    100-day semester in the control (low) forcing scenario, in which Rt=1.1, Nexo=15 new exogenous
    exposures each week, and fnc=0.01. In the control scenario, the traditional individual
    surveillance testing approach leads to 399 total infections. Thus, the 11 additional infections
    under the wastewater surveillance plan represents an increase of about 2.8%. This difference is
    larger in the moderate (3.9%) and severe (4.7%) forcing scenarios, but remains within 5%. In
    practice, deploying a blend of wastewater and traditional individual screening approaches would
    mitigate the effects of this potential issue. Given these general similarities in outcomes, our
    results suggest that, under nominal or moderate risk conditions, wastewater surveillance is a
    viable and noninvasive option to monitor the campus population for signs of infection.
              Our risk analysis results (Sec 3.3) suggest that perceived reliability - which is the only
    reliability that will be known in practice - will generally be higher than the actual reliability of
    maintaining Imax,14<100. This is driven by the result that wastewater sampling is targeted to a
    portion of asymptomatic cases (Fig 2). Thus, in practice, we expect that a wastewater sampling
    plan may appear to keep the overall infection count low, but asymptomatic cases will go
    unnoticed. By contrast, traditional individual screening tests appear to overestimate the actual
    number of infections for low- or moderate-risk scenarios (Fig 2A, C). These results have
    profound practical implications. This result implies that universities that exceed the New York
    State 100-infection limit and were using a traditional individual surveillance testing approach
    may not have actually exceeded the 100-infection threshold due to a prevalence of false
    positive results. On the other hand, universities that employ a wastewater surveillance approach
    may exceed the 100-infection threshold even if they have an apparent 14-day running total
    infection count below 100 infections.
              Consistent with the results of Paltiel et al. [4], through our global sensitivity analysis, we
    find that the sensitivity and specificity of the screening tests do not play a central role in
    contributing to the uncertainty in the overall number of infections. This is, of course, conditioned
    on the prior distributions that we have chosen for the sensitivity and specificity parameters,
    which exclude sensitivities less than 70% and specificities less than 95%. As new testing
    methods become available, it may be necessary to update these prior distributions.
    Uncertainties in the testing sensitivity and specificity are dwarfed by the uncertainties in on-the-
    ground conditions and campus health response, including the effective reproductive rate (Rt)
    and the frequency and rate of infections of campus community members from off-campus
                                                                       18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    interactions (Fig 3). Additionally, we have chosen the prior distributions for all of the model
    parameters in order to best represent the conditions facing our home institution in New York
    State. The choices for the specific forms and parameterizations of these distributions involves
    many subjective choices, which offer opportunities for further exploration. For example, the
    times required to carry out surveillance tests (Ts and Ts,ww) could be reparameterized as rate
    parameters and assigned gamma distributions as their conjugate priors. Here, we retain the
    time lengths as parameters to reflect the fact that these time-scales are the decision levers that
    would be directly manipulated by campus decision-makers by prescribing, for example, weekly
    surveillance testing.
              There are, of course, practical steps that a university may take to enhance the efficacy of
    a wastewater screening protocol beyond what we have illustrated here in our stylized model
    university. For example, after a wastewater sample result shows signs of infection, our model
    assumes that all asymptomatic and exposed individuals who triggered the positive result are
    within an identifiable group of size Nbuilding, but this group still interacts with other members of the
    campus community as wastewater-triggered screening tests are administered. Spread of virus
    may be further mitigated by quarantining the affected building(s). Additionally, our risk analysis
    focuses on examining how wastewater testing alone can be an effective tool to keep overall
    infection numbers low. Our results from Sec 3.1 indicate that the reliability of maintaining
    Imax,14<100 infections can likely be improved by complementing wastewater screening with
    traditional individual surveillance testing.
              As with any model, the coarse nature of our model and the original model of Paltiel et al.
    [4] means that the results should not be taken as a prediction of specific future behavior or
    infection rates. Rather, these models serve as a tool to evaluate the efficacy of various policy
    decisions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 on college campuses, and the impacts of
    uncertainties on infection rates. Our model for wastewater surveillance assumes that some
    constant fraction, fww, of individuals in the exposed and asymptomatic compartments can
    contribute to a positive wastewater signal. However, this is an approximation of the reality that
    the levels of viral shedding in wastewater contributions varies with time during an infection.
    Additionally, time-variability in the reproductive rate, Rt, may become important as the Northern
    Hemisphere enters winter and, in cold and rainy areas, people will spend more time indoors.
    Specifically, previous work has estimated a winter Rt of about 2.2, in contrast to a summer Rt of
    1.3 [31]. Our risk analysis indicates that such an increase of Rt would dramatically diminish the
    ability of universities to maintain low infection rates (Fig 4B). Taken together, these findings
    underscore the importance of mask and physical distancing mandates, moratoriums on large
    gatherings, reduced classroom capacities, and striking a careful balance between in-person and
    online learning modalities, which can reduce the number of students and faculty circulating on
    campus at any given time. This balance will of course be different for different campuses, and
    should be driven by science and evidence that is specific to the unique conditions faced by each
    university. Decision-makers must carefully consider how the distribution of class modalities
    affects the numbers of contacts among students each day and how, in turn, this affects
    transmission rates on college campuses.
    5 Conclusions
              We have presented a model to represent wastewater screening and incorporated it into
    an existing SEIR compartment model [4] to track the spread of an infection within a college
    campus community. We find that wastewater surveillance is an effective approach to detect and
    remove infected individuals from circulating among the campus community. Under nominal or
    moderate-risk conditions, the model predicts that wastewater surveillance can maintain an
                                                                       19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
    overall number of infections similar to the performance of weekly traditional surveillance testing,
    while also dramatically reducing the number of false positive cases (Fig 2). A period of one day
    to receive a positive wastewater result, interpret it, and initiate a plan for screening tests,
    combined with a period of 2 days to complete the screening tests, appears to form the most
    robust strategy to maintain low infection rates. However, complementing a wastewater
    surveillance program with conventional surveillance testing via nasal swabs would offer
    improvements. These results have practical importance for developing strategies to mitigate the
    spread of COVID-19 on college campuses.
    6 Acknowledgements
    We thank Enid Cardinal, Wendy Gelbard and Lindsay Phillips for informative conversations
    about the surveillance testing plans for the Rochester Institute of Technology. We thank A.
    David Paltiel for assistance interpreting the original SEIR model. We thank Srikanth
    Aravamuthan, Sean Kent, Steve Goldstein, and Brian Yandell for sharing the source code for
    the original SEIR model and providing the SEIR model dashboard (https://data-
    viz.it.wisc.edu/covid-19-screening/). Any views expressed in this work are solely those of the
    authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of our home institution.
    7 Data Availability
    All model codes, analysis codes, input files, and output data sets are freely available at
    https://github.com/tonyewong/SEIR-WW under the MIT open-source license.
    8 Author Contributions
    GT and TW conceived the study. GT, DR and NB wrote the original exploratory model for the
    RIT test case. TW wrote the modified model for wastewater sampling, ran the simulations, and
    wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors analyzed the model output, developed the
    figures, and contributed to the final versions of the model and the manuscript.
    9 References
    1.      Booeshaghi AS, Tan FH, Renton B, Berger Z, Pachter L. Markedly heterogeneous
            COVID-19 testing plans among US colleges and universities. medRxiv. 2020;
            2020.08.09.20171223. doi:10.1101/2020.08.09.20171223
    2.      United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Testing, Screening,
            and Outbreak Response for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs). 2020 [cited 9 Oct
            2020]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/colleges-
            universities/ihe-testing.html
    3.      New York Times. Colleges Learn How to Suppress Coronavirus: Extensive Testing. 2020
            [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/02/us/colleges-
            coronavirus-success.html
    4.      Paltiel AD, Zheng A, Walensky RP. Assessment of SARS-CoV-2 Screening Strategies to
            Permit the Safe Reopening of College Campuses in the United States. JAMA Netw open.
            2020;3: e2016818. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.16818
    5.      Lopman B, Liu C, Le Guillou A, Handel A, Lash TL, Isakov A, et al. A model of COVID-19
            transmission and control on university campuses. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.06.23.20138677.
                                                                       20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
            doi:10.1101/2020.06.23.20138677
    6.      Borowiak M, Ning F, Pei J, Zhao S, Tung H-R, Durrett R. Controlling the spread of
            COVID-19 on college campuses. 2020; 1–10. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07293
    7.      New York Times. Looking to Reopen, Colleges Become Labs for Coronavirus Tests and
            Tracking Apps. 2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available:
            https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/30/us/colleges-coronavirus-research.html
    8.      CDC. National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS). 2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020].
            Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/wastewater-
            surveillance.html
    9.      Mandal P, Gupta AK, Dubey BK. A review on presence, survival, disinfection/removal
            methods of coronavirus in wastewater and progress of wastewater-based epidemiology. J
            Environ Chem Eng. 2020/08/05. 2020;8: 104317. doi:10.1016/j.jece.2020.104317
    10.     WHO. Status of environmental surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 virus. 2020. Available:
            https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/status-of-environmental-
            surveillance-for-sars-cov-2-virus
    11.     Jorgensen AU, Gamst J, Hansen LV, Knudsen IIH, Jensen SKS. Eurofins Covid-19
            Sentinel TM Wastewater Test Provide Early Warning of a potential COVID-19 outbreak.
            medRxiv. 2020; 2020.07.10.20150573. doi:10.1101/2020.07.10.20150573
    12.     Kermack WO, McKendrick AG. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
            Proc R Soc London Ser A Math Phys Sci A. 1927;115: 700–721. doi:10.2307/2304150
    13.     Hethcote HW. Mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Rev. 2000.
            doi:10.1137/S0036144500371907
    14.     Aravamuthan S, Kent S, Goldstein S, Yandell B. Dashboard for Paltiel COVID-19
            Screening for College. 2020 [cited 31 Aug 2020]. Available: https://github.com/UW-
            Madison-DataScience/Paltiel-COVID-19-Screening-for-College
    15.     Abbott S, Hellewell J, Thompson RN, Sherratt K, Gibbs HP, et al. Estimating the time-
            varying reproduction number of SARS-CoV-2 using national and subnational case
            counts. Wellcome Open Res. 2020;5: 112. doi:10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16006.1
    16.     Systrom K, Vladek T, Krieger M. Rt.live. 2020 [cited 19 Sep 2020]. Available:
            https://github.com/rtcovidlive/covid-model
    17.     Petersen E, Koopmans M, Go U, Hamer DH, Petrosillo N, Castelli F, et al. Comparing
            SARS-CoV-2 with SARS-CoV and influenza pandemics. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;20:
            e238–e244. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30484-9
    18.     CDC. People with Certain Medical Conditions. 2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available:
            https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-with-medical-
            conditions.html
    19.     CDC. CDC updates, expands list of people at risk of severe COVID-19 illness. 2020
            [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2020/p0625-update-
            expands-covid-19.html
    20.     Edridge AWD, Kaczorowska J, Hoste ACR, Bakker M, Klein M, Loens K, et al. Seasonal
            coronavirus protective immunity is short-lasting. Nat Med. 2020. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-
            1083-1
    21.     CDC. Duration of Isolation and Precautions for Adults with COVID-19. 2020 [cited 9 Oct
            2020]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/duration-isolation.html
    22.     Northern Illinois University. Changes to Undergraduate Courses and In-person Activities.
            2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available: https://www.niu.edu/protecting-the-pack/updates/9-11-
            20-changes.shtml
    23.     Orlando Sentinel. Police break up FSU off-campus party with over 1,000 people. 2020
            [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available: https://www.orlandosentinel.com/coronavirus/os-ne-
            coronavirus-fsu-covid-party-20200928-svwrq753yjg5bavycmoanev76a-story.html
    24.     New York Times. A University Had a Great Coronavirus Plan, but Students Partied On.
                                                                       21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20210245.this version posted October 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                        It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .
            2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available:
            https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/10/health/university-illinois-covid.html
    25.     Daughton CG. Wastewater surveillance for population-wide Covid-19: The present and
            future. Sci Total Environ. 2020;736: 139631. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139631
    26.     Arizona U of. Wastewater testing at UArizona stops coronavirus spread; garners national
            attention. 2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020]. Available:
            https://west.arizona.edu/news/2020/08/wastewater-testing-uarizona-stops-coronavirus-
            spread-garners-national-attention
    27.     Sobol’ IM. Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical models and their Monte
            Carlo estimates. Math Comput Simul. 2001;55: 271–280. doi:10.1016/S0378-
            4754(00)00270-6
    28.     McKay MD, Beckman RJ, Conover WJ. Comparison of three methods for selecting
            values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code. Technometrics.
            1979. doi:10.1080/00401706.1979.10489755
    29.     Wong TE, Keller K. Deep Uncertainty Surrounding Coastal Flood Risk Projections: A
            Case Study for New Orleans. Earth’s Futur. 2017;5: 1015–1026.
            doi:10.1002/2017EF000607
    30.     New York State. Governor Cuomo Issues Guidance for Infection Rates on College
            Campuses Following Reports of Students at Large Gatherings. 2020 [cited 9 Oct 2020].
            Available: https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-issues-guidance-infection-
            rates-college-campuses-following-reports-students
    31.     Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Kissler et al 2020 Projecting
            the transmission dynamics through the postpandemic period. Science. 2020.
            doi:10.1126/science.abb5793
                                                                       22
