medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                           It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Title page
          Title
          Development and validation of the 4C Deterioration model for adults hospitalised with COVID-19.
          Authors
          Rishi K Gupta1, Ewen M Harrison2,3, Antonia Ho4,5, Annemarie B Docherty2,6, Stephen R Knight2,
                                       7                         1                  8,9                        10                2
          Maarten van Smeden , Ibrahim Abubakar , Marc Lipman , Matteo Quartagno , Riinu Pius , Iain
          Buchan11, Gail Carson12, Thomas M Drake2, Jake Dunning13,14, Cameron J Fairfield2, Carrol
          Gamble15, Christopher A Green16, Sophie Halpin17, Hayley E Hardwick18, Karl A Holden18, Peter W
                  12                     15                        2                    12                                      19
          Horby , Clare Jackson , Kenneth A Mclean , Laura Merson , Jonathan S Nguyen-Van-Tam , Lisa
          Norman2, Piero L Olliaro20, Mark G Pritchard20, Clark D Russell21, James Scott-Brown22, Catherine A
          Shaw2, Aziz Sheikh2, Tom Solomon18,23, Cathie Sudlow24, Olivia V Swann25, Lance Turtle18,26, Peter
                              14                        6,27                         18,28                            29
          JM Openshaw* , J Kenneth Baillie*                  , Malcolm G Semple*           , Mahdad Noursadeghi* on behalf of
          the ISARIC4C Investigators.
          *Contributed equally to this work
          Affiliations
          1. Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK
          2. Centre for Medical Informatics, The Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          3. Department of Clinical Surgery, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          4. Medical Research Council, University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, UK
          5. Department of Infectious Diseases, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK
          6. Intensive Care Unit, Royal Infirmary Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          7. Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht
               University, Utrecht, Netherlands
          8. UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine, University College London, London, UK
          9. Royal Free Hospitals NHS Trust, London, UK
          10. MRC Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Clinical Trials and Methodology, University College London,
               London, UK
          11. Institute of Population Health Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
          12. ISARIC Global Support Centre, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield
               Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
          13. National Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK
          14. National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK
          15. Liverpool Clinical Trials Centre, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
                                                                         1
       NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          16. Institute of Microbiology & Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
          17. Institute of Global Health, University College London, London, UK
          18. NIHR Health Protection Research Unit, Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences,
               Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
          19. Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Nottingham School of Medicine,
               Nottingham, UK
          20. Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
               Oxford, Oxford, UK
          21. Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          22. School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          23. Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK
          24. Health Data Research UK, London, UK
          25. Department of Child Life and Health, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          26. Tropical & Infectious Disease Unit, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, UK
          27. Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
          28. Respiratory Medicine, Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Institute in The Park, University of Liverpool,
               Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Liverpool L12 2AP, UK
          29. Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, UK
          Correspondence
          For ISARIC4C study processes:
          Malcolm G Semple (http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9700-0418) NIHR Health Protection Research Unit,
          Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences,
          University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7BE, UK. Email: m.g.semple@liverpool.ac.uk (Twitter
          @ProfCalumSemple)
          For model derivation:
          Prof Mahdad Noursadeghi (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4774-0853), Division of Infection & Immunity,
          Cruciform Building, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. Email:
          m.noursadeghi@ucl.ac.uk
                                                                        2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Abstract
          Prognostic models to predict the risk of clinical deterioration in acute COVID-19 are required to inform
          clinical management decisions. Among 75,016 consecutive adults across England, Scotland and
          Wales prospectively recruited to the ISARIC Coronavirus Clinical Characterisation Consortium
          (ISARIC4C) study, we developed and validated a multivariable logistic regression model for in-
          hospital clinical deterioration (defined as any requirement of ventilatory support or critical care, or
          death) using 11 routinely measured variables. We used internal-external cross-validation to show
          consistent measures of discrimination, calibration and clinical utility across eight geographical regions.
          We further validated the final model in held-out data from 8,252 individuals in London, with similarly
          consistent performance (C-statistic 0.77 (95% CI 0.75 to 0.78); calibration-in-the-large 0.01 (-0.04 to
          0.06); calibration slope 0.96 (0.90 to 1.02)). Importantly, this model demonstrated higher net benefit
          than using other candidate scores to inform decision-making. Our 4C Deterioration model thus
          demonstrates unprecedented clinical utility and generalisability to predict clinical deterioration among
          adults hospitalised with COVID-19.
                                                                        3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Introduction
          The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic continues to overwhelm healthcare systems
          worldwide1. Effective triage of patients presenting to hospital for risk of progressive deterioration is
          critical to inform clinical decision-making and facilitate effective resource allocation. Moreover, early
          identification of higher risk subgroups enables targeted recruitment for randomised controlled trials of
          therapies with equipoise2, and more precise delivery of treatments for which effectiveness is known to
          vary according to disease severity3–5.
          A large number of multivariable clinical prognostic models for patients with COVID-19 have rapidly
          accrued to predict adverse outcomes of mortality or clinical deterioration6. The vast majority of
          candidate models subjected to comprehensive quality assessment have been classified as being at
                                                                                    6,7
          high risk of bias, and therefore may not be generalisable . Moreover, none of the multivariable
          prognostic models included in a systematic head-to-head external validation study outperformed
          univariable predictors8, highlighting a critical need to adhere to rigorous model development
          methodology using large scale multi-site data, in order to facilitate generalisability.
          We have previously reported a pragmatic prognostic index for in-hospital mortality from the ISARIC
          Coronavirus Clinical Characterisation Consortium (ISARIC4C) study9. Here, we extend this work
          through a larger study cohort to develop and validate a prognostic model for in-hospital clinical
          deterioration. We use the wide geographic coverage of the ISARIC4C study cohort in England, Wales
          and Scotland to explore between-region heterogeneity, and to comprehensively assess model
          generalisability with respect to discrimination, calibration and clinical utility. We have called this the 4C
          Deterioration model.
                                                                        4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Methods
          Study population and data collection
          The International Severe Acute Respiratory and emerging Infections Consortium (ISARIC) World
          Health Organization (WHO) Clinical Characterisation Protocol UK (CCP-UK) study is being conducted
          by the ISARIC Coronavirus Clinical Characterisation Consortium (ISARIC4C) in 260 hospitals across
          England, Scotland, and Wales (National Institute for Health Research Clinical Research Network
          Central Portfolio Management System ID 14152). Further details of this prospective cohort study have
          been reported previously . In this analysis, we included consecutive adults (≥18 years) with highly
                                           10
          suspected or confirmed COVID-19 in whom eligibility criteria were confirmed. The study is reported in
          accordance with transparent reporting of a multivariable prediction model for individual prognosis or
                                                  11
          diagnosis (TRIPOD) guidance . Demographic, clinical, and outcome data were collected through a
          standardised case record form as reported previously9,10,12. In this analysis, hospitals were classified
          and analysed by UK National Health Service (NHS) region13.
          Outcomes
          We defined a composite primary outcome of in-hospital ‘clinical deterioration’ that includes: (a)
          initiation of ventilatory support (non-invasive ventilation, invasive mechanical ventilation or extra-
          corporeal membrane oxygenation); (b) high-dependency or intensive care unit admission; or (c)
          death. This composite outcome aligns closely with World Health Organization Clinical Progression
          Scale ≥6 and ensures that the outcome is generalisable between hospitals, since respiratory support
          practices may vary considerably14. We only included participants admitted or first assessed for
          COVID-19 until 26/08/2020 in order to allow a minimum four-week interval for registration of outcome
          events (until final data extraction date of 24/09/2020). Participants who had ongoing hospital care at
          the end of follow-up were classified as not meeting the endpoint, since the risk of deterioration
          declines with time since admission8. Missing outcomes were imputed, as described below.
          Candidate predictors
          We specified candidate predictor variables a priori based on previous prognostic scores, and
          emerging literature describing routinely measured biomarkers associated with COVID-19 prognosis,
          as described previously9. We only considered predictors available in at least 60% of the study
          population for further analysis. In addition to the variables included in our previous analysis, we
                                                                        5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          included nosocomial COVID-19 acquisition as an additional candidate predictor, since we
          hypothesised that acquisition of infection in hospital may be associated with differential outcomes.
          Community-acquired infection was defined as symptom onset or first positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR
          within 7 days from admission; participants who did not meet these criteria and had either symptom
          onset or first positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR >7 days from admission were classified as nosocomial
                  15
          cases . Nosocomial cases who met the deterioration outcome prior to onset of COVID-19 were
          excluded.
          Comorbidities were defined according to a modified Charlson comorbidity index16, with the addition of
                                                                          9
          clinician-defined obesity, as reported previously . We considered a composite ‘number of
          comorbidities’ variable for inclusion in the model, which included the following co-morbidities: chronic
          cardiac disease, chronic respiratory disease (excluding asthma), chronic renal disease, mild to severe
          liver disease, dementia, chronic neurological disease, connective tissue disease, diabetes mellitus,
          HIV or AIDS, malignancy and clinician-defined obesity.
          All predictors were taken from the day of hospital admission, or the day of first clinical suspicion of
          COVID-19 for patients with nosocomial infection. Continuous predictors were modelled with restricted
          cubic splines using a default of four knots, placed at recommended locations based on percentiles17.
          Glasgow coma scale was categorised as 15 vs. <15 since there were insufficient data points below 15
          to fit spline functions.
          Sample size
          We assumed a priori that at least 30% of hospital admission would reach the primary outcome. The
                                                                                                                              18–
          most comparable existing tools for risk stratification are the qSOFA, NEWS2, and CURB-65 scores
          20
             . qSOFA achieved C-statistics ranging from 0.71-0.78 during external validation18. Based on a
          conservative C-statistic of 0.71, we assumed a Cox-Snell R2 of 0.24. With 40 candidate predictor
          parameters (including transformations), the minimum sample size required for new model
          development was estimated to be 1,290, with 387 events21,22.
          Missing data
          We handled missing data (including predictors and outcomes) using multiple imputation with chained
                                                                    23                                   24
          equations, assuming missingness at random , using the mice package in R . We included all
                                                                        6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          predictors (including restricted cubic spline transformations) and the outcome in the imputation
          models to ensure compatibility. Imputation was done separately for each NHS region to preserve
          potential inter-region heterogeneity. We generated 10 multiply imputed datasets; all primary analyses
          were performed in each imputed dataset and model and validation parameters were pooled using
          Rubin’s rules 25.
          Model development
          We hypothesised that heterogeneity among populations, healthcare services and clinical
          management may be present between NHS regions, which may contribute to differences in model
          performance; we therefore split the dataset according to the region of the contributing hospital. We
          included eight regions in model development and internal-external cross validation (East of England,
          the Midlands, North East England and Yorkshire, North West England, Scotland, South East England,
          South West England and Wales), with one region held out for further validation (London).
          We used a logistic regression modelling approach and performed backward elimination of the a priori
          candidate variables using Akaike information criterion (AIC). This process was done separately in
          each multiply imputed dataset and in each NHS region in the development set. Predictors were
          required to be retained in >50% of multiply imputed datasets in >50% of development NHS regions in
          order to enter the final model. We specified this in order to retain a parsimonious set of predictors that
          had consistent prognostic value across the development NHS regions.
          Internal-external cross-validation
          The model including the selected variables was then validated in the development dataset using the
          internal-external cross-validation framework, in order to concurrently examine between-region
                                                               26
          heterogeneity and assess generalisability . During each internal-external cross-validation cycle, one
          of the contributing NHS regions within the development set was iteratively discarded from model
          training. Validation was then evaluated in the omitted NHS region by quantifying the model C-statistic,
                                                                  27
          calibration slope and calibration-in-the-large . We used random-effects meta-analysis to calculate
          pooled C-statistic, calibration slope and calibration-in-the-large statistics from internal-external cross-
          validation, and forest plots were examined to assess heterogeneity between regions. Calibration plots
          were also generated for each internal-external cross-validation cycle by fitting a loess smoother
          between the model predictions and the outcome in the stacked multiply imputed datasets.
                                                                        7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Recalibration to each region was performed by re-estimating the model intercept in the validation sets
          during each internal-external cross-validation cycle.
          Decision curve analysis was also done in the internal-external cross-validation validation sets to
          quantify the net benefit of implementing the model in clinical practice28, compared to: (a) a ‘treat all’
          approach; (b) a ‘treat none’ approach; and (c) using other candidate generic and COVID-specific
                                                                                                                     6,8,9
          clinical prognostic models to stratify treatment, identified by recent systematic reviews                       . Only
          candidate models where constituent variables were available among >60% of the cohort were
          considered. Candidate models using points scores were calibrated to the validation data during
          decision curve analysis, resulting in optimistic estimates of their net benefit. All decision curves were
          loess-smoothed, from stacked multiply imputed datasets.
          Model validation in held-out NHS region
          The final model was then trained using the full development dataset and validation was further
          evaluated in the held-out NHS region (London) by quantifying the C-statistic, calibration slope and
          calibration-in-the-large, and by visualisation of calibration plots27. Decision curve analysis was also
          performed, with comparison to other candidate models.
          All analyses were conducted in R (version 3.6.3) using tidyverse (version 1.3.0)29, rms (version 6.0-
          1)30 for logistic regression modelling, mice (version 3.11.0)24 for multiple imputation and rmda (version
               31
          1.6) for decision curve analysis.
          Sensitivity analyses
          We assessed validation of the final model using complete case data only in the held-out NHS region.
          We also recalculated validation metrics when: (a) excluding participants who experienced the
          outcome on the day of admission, in order to assess discrimination of the final model without these
          early events; (b) excluding participants in the validation cohort who had ongoing hospital care at the
          end of follow-up; (c) stratifying the validation cohort by community vs. nosocomial infection; and (d)
          excluding community-acquired cases who developed symptoms in the interval between admission
          and the temporal threshold for nosocomial infection, in order to assess any effect of incorrect
          inclusion of nosocomial infections within the community acquired cases. We also repeated the
          analysis using an alternative multiple imputation approach, using the aregImpute function from the
                                                                        8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          rms package in R30, and recalculated model parameters using alternative temporal definitions of
          nosocomial SARS-CoV-2 infection (>5 days and >10 days after admission, compared to >7 days in
          the primary analysis).
          Ethical approval
          Ethical approval was given by the South Central-Oxford C Research Ethics Committee in England
          (reference 13/SC/0149), and by the Scotland A Research Ethics Committee (reference 20/SS/0028).
          The study was registered at https://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN66726260.
                                                                        9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Results
          Overview of study cohort
          A total of 75,016 adults were recruited to the ISARIC4C study during the study period. Baseline
          demographic, physiological and laboratory characteristics of the cohort are shown stratified by
          outcome in Table 1 and by community vs. nosocomial infection in Supplementary Table 1. A total of
          31,993/74,018 (43.2%) participants with outcomes available met the composite primary outcome of
          clinical deterioration during hospital admission. The interval between hospital admission and
          deterioration events, stratified by deterioration category, is shown in Supplementary Figure 1 (median
          time to deterioration 4 days; interquartile range 1-9). The overall risk of deterioration generally
          declined with increasing time from admission, supporting our approach to classify patients requiring
          ongoing hospital care at the end of follow-up as not meeting an endpoint in the primary analysis.
          Outcomes were missing for 998/75,016 (1.3%) participants.
          Development of the 4C Deterioration model
          Since we hypothesised that geographic heterogeneity may contribute to model performance, we
          analysed the dataset by UK National Health Service (NHS) region. We included eight regions in
          model development (sample sizes range 3,068 to 15,599; total n=66,764), with one region (London;
          n=8,252) held out for additional validation. Candidate predictors and their proportions of missingness,
          stratified by NHS region, are shown in Supplementary Figure 2. Proportions of missingness appeared
          similar across regions for each variable.
          Following our backward elimination procedure, 11 predictors were retained in >50% of multiply
          imputed datasets in >50% of NHS regions in the development cohort. These were: age, sex,
          nosocomial infection, Glasgow coma scale, admission oxygen saturation, breathing room air or
          oxygen therapy, respiratory rate, urea, C-reactive protein, lymphocyte count and presence of
          radiographic chest infiltrates. Associations (including non-linearities) between these predictors and the
          outcome from the model trained on the full development cohort are shown visually in Figure 1. Full
          model coefficients are presented to enable independent model reconstruction in Supplementary Table
          2.
                                                                       10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Internal-external cross-validation
          In order to examine potential heterogeneity between NHS regions and evaluate generalisability, we
                                                                 26
          conducted internal-external cross-validation              of the prognostic model in the development cohort. In
          this process, we iteratively excluded one of the eight contributing NHS regions from the development
          set; the model was then trained using the 11 selected predictors in the remaining 7 development
          regions before being validated in the omitted region.
          Forest plots showing model discrimination (C-statistic) and calibration metrics (slope and calibration-
          in-the-large (CITL) from internal-external cross-validation are shown in Figure 2. An ideal calibration
          slope is 1, while CITL should be 0 if the number of observed outcome events matches the number
          predicted. C-statistics were consistent across development NHS regions (point estimates 0.75-0.77;
          pooled random effects meta-analysis estimate 0.76; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 0.75 to 0.77).
          Calibration slopes were also consistent across regions, with little evidence of heterogeneity (point
          estimates 0.95-1.06; pooled estimate 0.99; 95% CI 0.97 to 1.02). There was minor heterogeneity
          across NHS regions in CITL, likely reflecting some variation in baseline risk between regions (point
          estimates -0.20 to 0.13; pooled estimate -0.01; 95% CI -0.11 to 0.09). Overall risk was slightly
          underestimated in South East England (CITL 0.09; 95% CI 0.04 to 0.14) and Wales (CITL 0.13; 95%
          CI 0.06 to 0.21), and overestimated in Scotland (CITL -0.20; 95% CI -0.28 to -0.11) and South West
          England (CITL -0.19; 95% CI -0.26 to -0.11). Pooled calibration plots by NHS region are shown in
          Supplementary Figure 3a.
          In view of the minor variation in CITL between NHS regions, we also repeated internal-external cross
          validation with recalibration to each NHS region by re-estimation of the model intercept; calibration
          plots with recalibrated intercepts confirmed small improvements in model calibration (Supplementary
          Figure 3b).
          Decision curve analyses in the validation sets in internal-external cross-validation, without
          recalibration of the new model, are shown in Supplementary Figure 4, with benchmarking to 11
          existing candidate prognostic models for which the constituent variables were available in >60% of
          participants in our data. In decision curve analysis, net benefit allows assessment of clinical utility by
          quantifying the trade-off between correctly identifying true positives and incorrectly identifying false
          positives weighted according to the threshold probability28. The threshold probability represents the
                                                                       11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          risk cut-off above which any given treatment or intervention might be considered, and reflects the
          underlying risk:benefit ratio for the intervention. The new model for clinical deterioration had higher
          net benefit than any of the existing models as well as ‘treat all’ or ‘treat none’ strategies, across a
          broad range of threshold probabilities, in all development NHS regions (without local recalibration).
          Validation in held-out NHS region
          Next, we validated the final prognostic model, trained on the full development cohort, in the held-out
          NHS region (London; n=8,252). Discrimination and calibration metrics for the 4C Deterioration model
          were similar to the estimates from internal-external cross validation (Table 2), with C-statistic 0.77
          (95% CI 0.75 to 0.78), CITL 0.01 (-0.04 to 0.06) and slope 0.96 (0.90 to 1.02). Discrimination was
          higher for the 4C Deterioration model than for the other existing candidates. A loess-smoothed
          calibration curve for the held-out London region is shown in Figure 3a.
          We then conducted decision curve analysis in the held-out NHS region to further examine clinical
          utility for the 4C Deterioration model. Importantly, this demonstrated higher net benefit than all other
          candidates that we were able to recreate, as well as the ‘treat all’ and ‘treat none’ approaches, across
          a range of threshold probabilities (Figure 3b).
          We anticipate that clinicians may wish to evaluate risk of deterioration or death separately. Therefore,
          for illustration, we compared predictions from the 4C Deterioration model to our previously reported
                                    9
          4C Mortality Score in the London validation cohort, stratified by age (Figure 4a). In addition, 10
          example participants selected at random from each decile of 4C Deterioration predictions in the
          London cohort are shown in Figure 4b, with their clinical characteristics summarised in Figure 4c.
          Overall, deterioration predictions appeared appropriately higher than those for mortality, but these
          differences were exaggerated among younger age groups.
          Sensitivity analyses
          Recalculation of model validation metrics in complete case data from the held-out London region
          showed similar results to the primary analyses (Supplementary Table 3). Exclusion of deterioration
          events on the day of admission in the London validation cohort resulted in slightly lower C-statistics
          for most models; discrimination remained higher for the 4C Deterioration model, compared to other
          candidates (Supplementary Table 4). Validation metrics in the London cohort appeared similar to the
                                                                       12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          primary analysis when excluding participants who had ongoing hospital care at the end of follow-up
          (Supplementary Table 5), when restricted to community-acquired infections (Supplementary Table
          6a), and when community-acquired infections with symptom onset after admission were excluded
          (Supplementary Table 7). Among nosocomial infections, the C-statistic appeared slightly lower for the
          4C Deterioration model than in the primary analysis (0.72; 95% CI 0.67 to 0.77), though discrimination
          remained higher than other candidate models, and CITL was 0.39 (95% CI 0.2 to 0.59), suggesting
          some underestimation of risk (Supplementary Table 6b). Repeating the analyses using an alternative
          multiple imputation approach and with shorter and longer temporal definitions of nosocomial infection
          led to similar results to the primary analysis (Supplementary Figures 5-8; Supplementary Table 8).
                                                                       13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Discussion
          In this study, we developed and validated a prognostic model for clinical deterioration in a population
          of 75,016 consecutive adults hospitalised with COVID-19 and recruited to the ISARIC4C study across
          260 hospitals in England, Scotland and Wales. The final model integrates 11 predictors that are
          routinely measured in clinical practice. The model was initially validated through internal-external
          cross-validation, demonstrating consistent discrimination, calibration and net benefit across NHS
          regions. The final model was then further validated in the held-out London region and demonstrated
          consistent performance. Importantly, the 4C Deterioration model achieved higher net benefit than
          other candidate risk stratification tools across a broad range of risk thresholds - in all NHS regions.
          Thus, the 4C Deterioration model demonstrates strong potential for clinical utility and generalisability.
          Our 4C Deterioration model can be implemented programmatically alongside our previously reported
          4C Mortality Score9. The comparison of 4C Deterioration vs. 4C Mortality predictions among the
          London validation cohort showed higher predictions for deterioration overall; these differences were
          amplified among younger age groups. This suggests that younger people who deteriorated were more
          likely to have escalation of treatment through HDU/ICU admission or ventilatory support, while older
          people who deteriorated were more likely to die. These observations are likely to be mediated, in part,
          by differential treatment escalation decisions by age. Moreover, our comparison of the models for 10
          randomly selected patients across the distribution of outcome risks from the held-out validation cohort
          illustrates examples of cases with relatively low risk of death, but moderate to high risk of
          deterioration. These discordances underline the need for independent prognostic models for
          deterioration and mortality outcomes, thus empowering clinicians to predict their desired outcome as
          required to inform clinical management decisions.
          Our study has a number of strengths. Previous studies seeking to develop prognostic models for
          people with COVID-19 have been evaluated as being at high risk of bias due to suboptimal
          development methodology, and are often limited to single hospital sites6, thus impeding
                                                              8                                                                11
          generalisability during external validation . In the current study, we adhered to TRIPOD standards
          and retained continuous variables without arbitrary categorisation, while accounting for linearities, to
          avoid loss of information32. Moreover, we used the largest dataset to date, to our knowledge, to
          develop and validate the 4C Deterioration model, including data from hospitals across nine NHS
                                                                       14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          regions in England, Scotland and Wales. We exploited this wide geographic coverage to explore
          between-region heterogeneity in model performance using the recommended approach of internal-
                                          33
          external cross-validation . While discrimination, calibration slopes and net benefit were largely very
          consistent, we noted minor variation in CITL, suggesting some variation in baseline risk between
          regions. Our approach of recalibrating the model intercept to each NHS region demonstrated the
          potential to address such heterogeneity and could be used to update the model if risk is found to vary
          temporally (as novel therapies are implemented) and among different populations. However, it is
          notable that net benefit, which accounts for model discrimination and calibration in quantifying clinical
          utility, appeared higher for the 4C Deterioration model than all other candidates even without
          recalibration, across all NHS regions and in the held-out validation dataset. This was the case even
          when comparing to points-based models, which may achieve overly optimistic performance in during
          decision curve analysis since they were recalibrated to the validation data set. We also used a robust
          approach to missing data with multiple imputation, as widely recommended in prediction model
          studies34, and performed a sensitivity analysis using an alternative approach, with similar findings.
          Ongoing prospective external validation of the 4C Deterioration model will be required over time to
          consider the need for temporal recalibration35, and to include diverse international settings outside of
          the ISARIC4C study. Another limitation is that we only included predictors that were routinely
          measured as part of clinical care during the study period, and specified that they had to be available
          among >60% of the population for inclusion in the analysis. Thus, we were unable to assess
          candidate models that include predictors such as lactate dehydrogenase or D-dimer, since these
          variables were only available in a small minority of participants. Future studies could consider
          standardised capture of laboratory measurements considered to have prognostic value to enable
          inclusion of these variables in model development and validation at scale. Moreover, we note that
                                                                                                                      36
          novel molecular biomarkers currently under investigation may also offer prognostic value . Blood
          transcript, protein and metabolite measurements will be available from a subset of the ISARIC4C
          participants and could be integrated into risk-stratification tools in future studies.
          In summary, we present a prognostic model for clinical deterioration among hospitalised adults with
          community or hospital acquired COVID-19, validated in nine NHS regions in England, Scotland and
          Wales. The model uses readily available clinical predictors and will be made freely available online
                                                                       15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          alongside our previously reported mortality risk score (https://isaric4c.net/outputs/4c_score/)9 at the
          point of peer-reviewed publication, to inform clinical decision-making and patient stratification for
          therapeutic interventions. The underlying model coefficients are presented and code will be published
          to enable independent external validation in new datasets.
                                                                       16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Footnotes
          ISARIC4C Investigators
          Consortium Lead Investigator: J Kenneth Baillie, Chief Investigator: Malcolm G Semple, Co-Lead
          Investigator: Peter JM Openshaw. ISARIC Clinical Coordinator: Gail Carson. Co-Investigators:
          Beatrice Alex, Benjamin Bach, Wendy S Barclay, Debby Bogaert, Meera Chand, Graham S Cooke,
          Annemarie B Docherty, Jake Dunning, Ana da Silva Filipe, Tom Fletcher, Christopher A Green, Ewen
          M Harrison, Julian A Hiscox, Antonia Ying Wai Ho, Peter W Horby, Samreen Ijaz, Saye Khoo, Paul
          Klenerman, Andrew Law, Wei Shen Lim, Alexander J Mentzer, Laura Merson, Alison M Meynert,
          Mahdad Noursadeghi, Shona C Moore, Massimo Palmarini, William A Paxton, Georgios Pollakis,
          Nicholas Price, Andrew Rambaut, David L Robertson, Clark D Russell, Vanessa Sancho-Shimizu,
          Janet T Scott, Thushan de Silva, Louise Sigfrid, Tom Solomon, Shiranee Sriskandan, David Stuart,
          Charlotte Summers, Richard S Tedder, Emma C Thomson, AA Roger Thompson, Ryan S Thwaites,
          Lance CW Turtle, Maria Zambon. Project Managers: Hayley Hardwick, Chloe Donohue, Ruth Lyons,
          Fiona Griffiths, Wilna Oosthuyzen. Data Analysts: Lisa Norman, Riinu Pius, Tom M Drake, Cameron J
          Fairfield, Stephen Knight, Kenneth A Mclean, Derek Murphy, Catherine A Shaw. Data and Information
          System Managers: Jo Dalton, James Lee, Daniel Plotkin, Michelle Girvan, Egle Saviciute, Stephanie
          Roberts, Janet Harrison, Laura Marsh, Marie Connor, Sophie Halpin, Clare Jackson, Carrol Gamble.
          Data integration and presentation: Gary Leeming, Andrew Law, Murray Wham, Sara Clohisey, Ross
          Hendry, James Scott-Brown. Material Management: William Greenhalf, Victoria Shaw, Sarah
          McDonald. Patient engagement: Seán Keating. Outbreak Laboratory Staff and Volunteers: Katie A.
          Ahmed, Jane A Armstrong, Milton Ashworth, Innocent G Asiimwe, Siddharth Bakshi, Samantha L
          Barlow, Laura Booth, Benjamin Brennan, Katie Bullock, Benjamin WA Catterall, Jordan J Clark, Emily
          A Clarke, Sarah Cole, Louise Cooper, Helen Cox, Christopher Davis, Oslem Dincarslan, Chris Dunn,
          Philip Dyer, Angela Elliott, Anthony Evans, Lorna Finch, Lewis WS Fisher, Terry Foster, Isabel
          Garcia-Dorival, Willliam Greenhalf, Philip Gunning, Catherine Hartley, Antonia Ho, Rebecca L Jensen,
          Christopher B Jones, Trevor R Jones, Shadia Khandaker, Katharine King, Robyn T. Kiy, Chrysa
          Koukorava, Annette Lake, Suzannah Lant, Diane Latawiec, L Lavelle-Langham, Daniella Lefteri,
          Lauren Lett, Lucia A Livoti, Maria Mancini, Sarah McDonald, Laurence McEvoy, John McLauchlan,
          Soeren Metelmann, Nahida S Miah, Joanna Middleton, Joyce Mitchell, Shona C Moore, Ellen G
          Murphy, Rebekah Penrice-Randal, Jack Pilgrim, Tessa Prince, Will Reynolds, P. Matthew Ridley,
                                                                       17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Debby Sales, Victoria E Shaw, Rebecca K Shears, Benjamin Small, Krishanthi S Subramaniam,
          Agnieska Szemiel, Aislynn Taggart, Jolanta Tanianis-Hughes, Jordan Thomas, Erwan Trochu, Libby
          van Tonder, Eve Wilcock, J. Eunice Zhang. Local Principal Investigators: Kayode Adeniji, Daniel
          Agranoff, Ken Agwuh, Dhiraj Ail, Ana Alegria, Brian Angus, Abdul Ashish, Dougal Atkinson, Shahedal
          Bari, Gavin Barlow, Stella Barnass, Nicholas Barrett, Christopher Bassford, David Baxter, Michael
          Beadsworth, Jolanta Bernatoniene, John Berridge, Nicola Best, Pieter Bothma, David Brealey, Robin
          Brittain-Long, Naomi Bulteel, Tom Burden, Andrew Burtenshaw, Vikki Caruth, David Chadwick,
          Duncan Chambler, Nigel Chee, Jenny Child, Srikanth Chukkambotla, Tom Clark, Paul Collini,
          Catherine Cosgrove, Jason Cupitt, Maria-Teresa Cutino-Moguel, Paul Dark, Chris Dawson, Samir
          Dervisevic, Phil Donnison, Sam Douthwaite, Ingrid DuRand, Ahilanadan Dushianthan, Tristan Dyer,
          Cariad Evans, Chi Eziefula, Chrisopher Fegan, Adam Finn, Duncan Fullerton, Sanjeev Garg, Sanjeev
          Garg, Atul Garg, Effrossyni Gkrania-Klotsas, Jo Godden, Arthur Goldsmith, Clive Graham, Elaine
          Hardy, Stuart Hartshorn, Daniel Harvey, Peter Havalda, Daniel B Hawcutt, Maria Hobrok, Luke
          Hodgson, Anil Hormis, Michael Jacobs, Susan Jain, Paul Jennings, Agilan Kaliappan, Vidya
          Kasipandian, Stephen Kegg, Michael Kelsey, Jason Kendall, Caroline Kerrison, Ian Kerslake, Oliver
          Koch, Gouri Koduri, George Koshy, Shondipon Laha, Steven Laird, Susan Larkin, Tamas Leiner,
          Patrick Lillie, James Limb, Vanessa Linnett, Jeff Little, Michael MacMahon, Emily MacNaughton,
          Ravish Mankregod, Huw Masson, Elijah Matovu, Katherine McCullough, Ruth McEwen, Manjula
          Meda, Gary Mills, Jane Minton, Mariyam Mirfenderesky, Kavya Mohandas, Quen Mok, James Moon,
          Elinoor Moore, Patrick Morgan, Craig Morris, Katherine Mortimore, Samuel Moses, Mbiye Mpenge,
          Rohinton Mulla, Michael Murphy, Megan Nagel, Thapas Nagarajan, Mark Nelson, Igor Otahal, Mark
          Pais, Selva Panchatsharam, Hassan Paraiso, Brij Patel, Natalie Pattison, Justin Pepperell, Mark
          Peters, Mandeep Phull, Stefania Pintus, Jagtur Singh Pooni, Frank Post, David Price, Rachel Prout,
          Nikolas Rae, Henrik Reschreiter, Tim Reynolds, Neil Richardson, Mark Roberts, Devender Roberts,
          Alistair Rose, Guy Rousseau, Brendan Ryan, Taranprit Saluja, Aarti Shah, Prad Shanmuga, Anil
          Sharma, Anna Shawcross, Jeremy Sizer, Manu Shankar-Hari, Richard Smith, Catherine Snelson,
          Nick Spittle, Nikki Staines, Tom Stambach, Richard Stewart, Pradeep Subudhi, Tamas Szakmany,
          Kate Tatham, Jo Thomas, Chris Thompson, Robert Thompson, Ascanio Tridente, Darell Tupper-
          Carey, Mary Twagira, Andrew Ustianowski, Nick Vallotton, Lisa Vincent-Smith, Shico Visuvanathan,
          Alan Vuylsteke, Sam Waddy, Rachel Wake, Andrew Walden, Ingeborg Welters, Tony Whitehouse,
                                                                       18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Paul Whittaker, Ashley Whittington, Meme Wijesinghe, Martin Williams, Lawrence Wilson, Sarah
          Wilson, Stephen Winchester, Martin Wiselka, Adam Wolverson, Daniel G Wooton, Andrew Workman,
          Bryan Yates, and Peter Young.
          Acknowledgements
          This work uses data provided by patients and collected by the NHS as part of their care and support
          #DataSavesLives. We are extremely grateful to the 2,648 frontline NHS clinical and research staff and
          volunteer medical students, who collected this data in challenging circumstances; and the generosity
          of the participants and their families for their individual contributions in these difficult times. We also
          acknowledge the support of Jeremy J Farrar, Nahoko Shindo, Devika Dixit, Nipunie Rajapakse,
          Lyndsey Castle, Martha Buckley, Debbie Malden, Katherine Newell, Kwame O’Neill, Emmanuelle
          Denis, Claire Petersen, Scott Mullaney, Sue MacFarlane, Nicole Maziere, Julien Martinez, Oslem
          Dincarslan, and Annette Lake.
          Author contributions
          Conceptualisation: RKG, EMH, AH, ABD, PJMO, JKB, MGS, MN;
          Data curation: RP, SH, KAH, CJ, CAG, KAM, LM, LN, CDR, CAS, MGS, ABD, EMH;
          Formal analysis: RKG, EMH, MN;
          Funding acquisition: PWH, JSN-V-T, TS, PJMO, JKB, MGS, ABD;
          Investigation: RKG, EMH, AH, ABD, PJMO, JKB, MGS, MN;
          Methodology: RKG, EMH, AH, ABD, MVS, IA, ML, MQ, PJMO, JKB, MGS, MN;
          Project administration: SH, HEH, CJ, LM, LN, CDR, CAS, MGS;
          Resources: CG, PWH, LM, TS, MGS, EMH;
          Software: N/A;
          Supervision: RKG, EMH, AH, ABD, IA, ML, PJMO, JKB, MGS, MN;
          Visualisation: RKG, EMH, JS-B, MN;
          Writing-original draft: RKG, MN;
          Writing-review and editing: RKG, EMH, AH, ABD, MVS, IA, ML, MQ, SRK, RP, IB, GC, TMD, CAG,
          JD, CJF, LM, JSN-V-T, PLO, MGP, CDR, JS-B, AS, CS, OVS, LCWT, PJMO, JKB, MGS, MN.
                                                                       19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Funding
          This work is supported by grants from: the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR; award CO-
          CIN-01), the Medical Research Council (MRC; grant MC_PC_19059), and by the NIHR Health
          Protection Research Unit (HPRU) in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections at University of Liverpool in
          partnership with Public Health England (PHE), in collaboration with Liverpool School of Tropical
          Medicine and the University of Oxford (award 200907), NIHR HPRU in Respiratory Infections at
          Imperial College London with PHE (award 200927), Wellcome Trust and Department for International
          Development (DID; 215091/Z/18/Z), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (OPP1209135), Liverpool
          Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre (grant reference C18616/A25153), NIHR Biomedical Research
          Centre at Imperial College London (IS-BRC-1215-20013), EU Platform for European Preparedness
          Against (Re-)emerging Epidemics (PREPARE; FP7 project 602525), and NIHR Clinical Research
          Network for providing infrastructure support for this research.
          RKG is funded by National Institute for Health Research (DRF-2018-11-ST2-004 to RKG). MN is
          funded by the Wellcome Trust (207511/Z/17/Z). IA acknowledges NIHR Senior Investigator Award
          (NF-SI-0616-10037) funding. ML acknowledges NIHR (HTA 16/88/06) funding. PJMO is supported by
          a NIHR senior investigator award (201385). LT is supported by the Wellcome Trust (award
          205228/Z/16/Z). MN is funded by a WT investigator award (207511/Z/17/Z) and the NIHR University
          College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre.
          The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Health
          and Social Care, DID, NIHR, MRC, Wellcome Trust, or PHE. The funders had no role in the study
          design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the
          decision to submit the article for publication.
          Competing interests
          All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf
          and declare: support from the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), the Medical Research
          Council (MRC), the NIHR Health Protection Research Unit (HPRU) in Emerging and Zoonotic
          Infections at University of Liverpool, Public Health England (PHE), Liverpool School of Tropical
          Medicine, University of Oxford, NIHR HPRU in Respiratory Infections at Imperial College London,
          Wellcome Trust, Department for International Development, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
                                                                       20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Liverpool Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Imperial
          College London, EU Platform for European Preparedness Against (Re-)emerging Epidemics
          (PREPARE), and NIHR Clinical Research Network for the submitted work; ABD reports grants from
          Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), during the conduct of the study, grants from
          Wellcome Trust, outside the submitted work; CAG reports grants from DHSC National Institute of
          Health Research (NIHR) UK, during the conduct of the study; PWH reports grants from Wellcome
          Trust, Department for International Development, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, NIHR, during
          the conduct of the study; JSN-V-T reports grants from DHSC, England, during the conduct of the
          study, and is seconded to DHSC, England; MN is supported by a Wellcome Trust investigator award
          and the NIHR University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre (BRC); PJMO
          reports personal fees from consultancies and from European Respiratory Society, grants from MRC,
          MRC Global Challenge Research Fund, EU, NIHR BRC, MRC/GSK, Wellcome Trust, NIHR (Health
          Protection Research Unit (HPRU) in Respiratory Infection), and is NIHR senior investigator outside
          the submitted work; his role as President of the British Society for Immunology was unpaid but travel
          and accommodation at some meetings was provided by the Society; JKB reports grants from MRC
          UK; MGS reports grants from DHSC NIHR UK, grants from MRC UK, grants from HPRU in Emerging
          and Zoonotic Infections, University of Liverpool, during the conduct of the study, other from Integrum
          Scientific LLC, Greensboro, NC, USA, outside the submitted work; LCWT reports grants from HPRU
          in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, University of Liverpool, during the conduct of the study, and
          grants from Wellcome Trust outside the submitted work; EMH, HEH, JD, RG, RP, LN, KAH, GC, LM,
          SH, CJ, and CG, all declare: no support from any organisation for the submitted work; no financial
          relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous
          three years; and no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted
          work.
          Data sharing statement
          We welcome applications for data and material access via our Independent Data and Material Access
          Committee (https://isaric4c.net).
                                                                       21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Code availability statement
          The final prognostic model developed in this study will be made freely available at the point of peer-
          reviewed publication, to enable implementation in clinical practice and independent external validation
          in new datasets. The code underlying the prediction tool will also be made available.
                                                                       22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          References
          1.       World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Weekly Epidemiological
                   Update. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports
                   (2020).
          2.       Furlow, B. COVACTA trial raises questions about tocilizumab’s benefit in COVID-19. Lancet
                   Rheumatol. (2020) doi:10.1016/S2665-9913(20)30313-1.
          3.       Beigel, J. H. et al. Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 — Preliminary Report. N. Engl. J.
                   Med. NEJMoa2007764 (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2007764.
          4.       Sterne, J. A. C. et al. Association Between Administration of Systemic Corticosteroids and
                   Mortality Among Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19. JAMA (2020)
                   doi:10.1001/jama.2020.17023.
          5.       Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19 — Preliminary Report. N. Engl. J. Med.
                   NEJMoa2021436 (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2021436.
          6.       Wynants, L. et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19: systematic
                   review and critical appraisal. BMJ 369, (2020).
          7.       Wolff, R. F. et al. PROBAST: A Tool to Assess the Risk of Bias and Applicability of Prediction
                   Model Studies. Ann. Intern. Med. 170, 51 (2019).
          8.       Gupta, R. K. et al. Systematic evaluation and external validation of 22 prognostic models
                   among hospitalised adults with COVID-19: An observational cohort study. Eur. Respir. J.
                   (2020) doi:10.1183/13993003.03498-2020.
          9.       Knight, S. R. et al. Risk stratification of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19 using the
                   ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: development and validation of the 4C
                   Mortality Score. BMJ m3339 (2020) doi:10.1136/bmj.m3339.
          10.      Docherty, A. B. et al. Features of 20133 UK patients in hospital with covid-19 using the
                   ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: prospective observational cohort study. BMJ
                   369, m1985 (2020).
          11.      Collins, G. S., Reitsma, J. B., Altman, D. G. & Moons, K. G. M. Transparent reporting of a
                   multivariable prediction model for individual prognosis or diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD
                   statement. BMJ 350, (2015).
          12.      COVID-19 Clinical Research Resources - ISARIC. https://isaric.tghn.org/covid-19-clinical-
                   research-resources/.
          13.      NHS Regional Teams. https://www.england.nhs.uk/about/regional-area-teams/.
          14.      WHO Working Group on the Clinical Characterisation and Management of COVID-19
                   infection, J. C. et al. A minimal common outcome measure set for COVID-19 clinical research.
                   Lancet. Infect. Dis. 0, (2020).
          15.      European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Surveillance definitions for COVID-19.
                   https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/surveillance/surveillance-definitions.
          16.      Charlson, M. E., Pompei, P., Ales, K. L. & MacKenzie, C. R. A new method of classifying
                   prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J. Chronic Dis. 40,
                   373–83 (1987).
          17.      Frank E Harrell. Biostatistical Modeling.
                   http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/wiki/pub/Main/BioMod/notes.pdf (2004).
          18.      Seymour, C. W. et al. Assessment of Clinical Criteria for Sepsis. JAMA 315, 762 (2016).
          19.      Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2 | RCP London.
                   https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/national-early-warning-score-news-2.
          20.      Lim, W. S. et al. Defining community acquired pneumonia severity on presentation to hospital:
                   an international derivation and validation study. Thorax 58, 377–382 (2003).
          21.      Riley, R. D. et al. Minimum sample size for developing a multivariable prediction model: PART
                   II - binary and time-to-event outcomes. Stat. Med. 38, 1276–1296 (2019).
          22.      Riley, R. D. et al. Calculating the sample size required for developing a clinical prediction
                   model. BMJ 368, m441 (2020).
          23.      White, I. R., Royston, P. & Wood, A. M. Multiple imputation using chained equations: Issues
                   and guidance for practice. Stat. Med. 30, 377–399 (2011).
          24.      Buuren, S. van & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. mice: Multivariate Imputation by Chained
                   Equations in R. J. Stat. Softw. 45(3), 1–67 (2011).
          25.      Rubin, D. B. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. (Wiley-Interscience, 2004).
          26.      Debray, T. P. A. et al. Individual Participant Data (IPD) Meta-analyses of Diagnostic and
                   Prognostic Modeling Studies: Guidance on Their Use. PLOS Med. 12, e1001886 (2015).
          27.      Steyerberg, E. W. & Vergouwe, Y. Towards better clinical prediction models: seven steps for
                                                                       23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                   development and an ABCD for validation. Eur. Heart J. 35, 1925–31 (2014).
          28.      Vickers, A. J., van Calster, B. & Steyerberg, E. W. A simple, step-by-step guide to interpreting
                   decision curve analysis. Diagnostic Progn. Res. 3, 18 (2019).
          29.      Wickham, H. et al. Welcome to the Tidyverse. J. Open Source Softw. 4, 1686 (2019).
          30.      Harrell Jr, F. E. rms: Regression Modeling Strategies. (2019).
          31.      Brown, M. rmda: Risk Model Decision Analysis. (2018).
          32.      Royston, P., Altman, D. G. & Sauerbrei, W. Dichotomizing continuous predictors in multiple
                   regression: a bad idea. Stat. Med. 25, 127–41 (2006).
          33.      Steyerberg, E. W. & Harrell, F. E. Prediction models need appropriate internal, internal–
                   external, and external validation. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 69, 245–247 (2016).
          34.      Riley, R. D., Windt, D. van der, Croft, P. & Moons, K. G. M. Prognosis research in
                   healthcare: concepts, methods, and impact.
          35.      Booth, S., Riley, R. D., Ensor, J., Lambert, P. C. & Rutherford, M. J. Temporal recalibration for
                   improving prognostic model development and risk predictions in settings where survival is
                   improving over time. Int. J. Epidemiol. (2020) doi:10.1093/ije/dyaa030.
          36.      Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature predicts COVID-19 severity and
                   survival. Nat. Med. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1051-9.
          37.      Smith, G. B., Prytherch, D. R., Meredith, P., Schmidt, P. E. & Featherstone, P. I. The ability of
                   the National Early Warning Score (NEWS) to discriminate patients at risk of early cardiac
                   arrest, unanticipated intensive care unit admission, and death. Resuscitation 84, 465–470
                   (2013).
          38.      Zhang, H. et al. Risk prediction for poor outcome and death in hospital in-patients with COVID-
                   19: derivation in Wuhan, China and external validation in London, UK. medRxiv
                   2020.04.28.20082222 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.04.28.20082222.
          39.      Olsson, T., Terent, A. & Lind, L. Rapid Emergency Medicine score: a new prognostic tool for
                   in-hospital mortality in nonsurgical emergency department patients. J. Intern. Med. 255, 579–
                   587 (2004).
          40.      Dwyer, R., Hedlund, J., Henriques-Normark, B. & Kalin, M. Improvement of CRB-65 as a
                   prognostic tool in adult patients with community-acquired pneumonia. BMJ Open Respir. Res.
                   1, e000038 (2014).
          41.      Miyashita, N., Matsushima, T., Oka, M. & Japanese Respiratory Society. The JRS guidelines
                   for the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults: an update and new
                   recommendations. Intern. Med. 45, 419–28 (2006).
          42.      Subbe, C. P., Kruger, M., Rutherford, P. & Gemmel, L. Validation of a modified Early Warning
                   Score in medical admissions. QJM 94, 521–526 (2001).
          43.      Seymour, C. W. et al. Assessment of Clinical Criteria for Sepsis. JAMA 315, 762 (2016).
          44.      Lu, J. et al. ACP risk grade: a simple mortality index for patients with confirmed or suspected
                   severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 disease (COVID-19) during the early stage
                   of outbreak in Wuhan, China. medRxiv 2020.02.20.20025510 (2020)
                   doi:10.1101/2020.02.20.20025510.
                                                                       24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                           It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Tables
          Table 1: Baseline characteristics of the study cohort, stratified by outcome
          Participants are shown by the first chronological deterioration category through which they met the
          composite primary outcome (high dependency unit (HDU) admission, intensive care (ICU) admission
          or ventilatory support, or death).
                                       Overall, N =        Ventilatory support or      Died, N =     No deterioration, N (Missing), N =
        Characteristic
                                          75,016           HDU/ICU, N = 15,0891         16,9041            = 42,0251          9981
        Age (years)                     75 (60, 84)              65 (55, 75)          83 (77, 89)         73 (57, 83)      75 (59, 84)
        Sex
           Female                     32,846 (44%)              5,156 (34%)          7,114 (42%)        20,142 (48%)       434 (44%)
           Male                       42,026 (56%)              9,910 (66%)          9,753 (58%)        21,800 (52%)       563 (56%)
           Missing                          144                       23                   37                  83               1
        Ethnicity
           White                      55,079 (83%)              9,985 (75%)         13,628 (90%)        30,855 (83%)       611 (79%)
           South Asian                 3,520 (5.3%)            1,010 (7.6%)           479 (3.1%)        1,992 (5.4%)       39 (5.1%)
           Black                       2,554 (3.8%)              744 (5.6%)           345 (2.3%)        1,435 (3.9%)       30 (3.9%)
           East Asian                   492 (0.7%)               162 (1.2%)            71 (0.5%)          255 (0.7%)        4 (0.5%)
           Other                       4,848 (7.3%)             1,406 (11%)           699 (4.6%)        2,656 (7.1%)        87 (11%)
           Missing                         8,523                    1,782                1,682               4,832             227
        Number of comorbidities           1 (1, 2)                 1 (0, 2)             2 (1, 3)            1 (0, 2)         1 (0, 2)
           Missing                          840                       68                  203                 406              163
        Nosocomial infection           7,385 (9.9%)              592 (3.9%)          2,111 (13%)         4,538 (11%)       144 (17%)
           Missing                          636                       62                  101                 345              128
        Radiographic infiltrates      29,594 (62%)              8,427 (77%)          6,965 (63%)        14,015 (55%)       187 (54%)
           Missing                        27,245                    4,132                5,929              16,534             650
        Temperature (°C)                37.2 (36.5,                                   37.1 (36.4,                          37.0 (36.5,
                                                             37.5 (36.8, 38.4)                        37.1 (36.5, 38.0)
                                           38.1)                                         38.0)                                38.0)
           Missing                         3,110                     463                  650                1,783             214
        Heart rate (per min)           90 (78, 104)             95 (82, 109)         90 (77, 105)        88 (76, 102)     89 (78, 102)
           Missing                         3,389                     424                  721                2,021             223
        Respiratory rate (per
                                        20 (18, 26)              24 (20, 30)          22 (18, 28)         20 (18, 24)      20 (18, 24)
        min)
           Missing                         3,537                     483                  689                2,113             252
        Systolic blood pressure          130 (114,                                     128 (110,                            130 (114,
                                                              129 (115, 145)                           130 (115, 147)
        (mmHg)                              147)                                         147)                                 148)
           Missing                         3,192                     428                  651                1,891             222
        Diastolic blood pressure
                                        74 (64, 84)              74 (65, 83)          71 (61, 82)         75 (65, 84)      73 (65, 83)
        (mmHg)
           Missing                         3,335                     460                  693                1,955             227
        SpO2 (%)                        95 (92, 97)              94 (89, 96)          95 (91, 97)         96 (94, 97)      96 (93, 98)
           Missing                         3,760                     538                  802                2,203             217
        Room air or oxygen
           Room air                   48,626 (69%)              7,249 (50%)          9,991 (63%)        30,810 (79%)       576 (76%)
           Oxygen                     21,469 (31%)              7,141 (50%)          5,827 (37%)         8,324 (21%)       177 (24%)
           Missing                         4,921                     699                 1,086               2,891             245
        Glasgow coma scale              15 (15, 15)              15 (15, 15)          15 (15, 15)         15 (15, 15)      15 (15, 15)
           Missing                         7,849                    1,762                1,697               4,021             369
                                                                            25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                            It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                       Overall, N =         Ventilatory support or      Died, N =     No deterioration, N (Missing), N =
         Characteristic
                                           75,016           HDU/ICU, N = 15,0891         16,9041           = 42,0251            9981
         Haemoglobin (g/L)               128 (112,                                      122 (105,                            128 (112,
                                                               132 (116, 145)                           129 (113, 142)
                                             142)                                          138)                                 141)
             Missing                       11,781                    1,422                2,568               7,449              342
         White cell count                                                                8.3 (5.8,
                                      7.5 (5.4, 10.7)           8.0 (5.7, 11.2)                          7.1 (5.2, 9.9)   7.7 (5.4, 10.7)
         (x10^9/L)                                                                        11.9)
             Missing                       12,163                    1,515                2,675               7,624              349
         Lymphocytes (x10^9/L)          0.90 (0.60,                                    0.80 (0.50,                          0.90 (0.60,
                                                              0.80 (0.60, 1.20)                        0.96 (0.67, 1.40)
                                            1.30)                                         1.16)                                 1.30)
             Missing                       12,377                    1,558                2,706               7,764              349
         Neutrophils (x10^9/L)         5.8 (3.9, 8.7)            6.4 (4.3, 9.3)       6.6 (4.3, 9.9)     5.3 (3.6, 7.9)    5.8 (3.7, 8.7)
             Missing                       12,341                    1,557                2,708               7,727              349
         Platelets (x10^9/L)             221 (167,                                      209 (154,                            218 (161,
                                                               219 (166, 287)                           226 (173, 294)
                                             291)                                          284)                                 285)
             Missing                       12,496                    1,562                2,736               7,848              350
         Alanine
                                        25 (16, 43)               33 (21, 54)          22 (15, 37)         24 (15, 40)      24 (15, 43)
         aminotransferase (IU/L)
             Missing                       26,783                    3,895                6,300              16,086              502
         Bilirubin (mg/dL)               10 (7, 14)                10 (7, 15)           10 (7, 15)          9 (6, 13)        10 (7, 14)
             Missing                       22,979                    3,143                5,317              14,026              493
         Urea (mmol/L)                    7 (5, 11)                 7 (5, 11)           10 (7, 16)           6 (4, 9)         7 (5, 12)
             Missing                       18,554                    2,794                3,974              11,345              441
         Creatinine (µmol/L)           86 (67, 121)              86 (68, 118)        106 (76, 158)        81 (64, 107)     85 (68, 122)
             Missing                       12,693                    1,636                2,706               7,999              352
         Sodium (mmol/L)                 137 (134,                                      138 (135,                            137 (134,
                                                               136 (133, 139)                           137 (134, 140)
                                             140)                                          143)                                 140)
             Missing                       12,312                    1,515                2,631               7,811              355
         C-reactive protein (mg/L)     80 (33, 154)             126 (64, 210)         98 (48, 174)        58 (22, 119)     76 (30, 151)
             Missing                       16,353                    2,223                3,515              10,203              412
         NHS region
             East of England           7,865 (10%)               1,653 (11%)          1,935 (11%)        4,223 (10%)         54 (5.4%)
             London                    8,252 (11%)               2,287 (15%)          1,510 (8.9%)       4,400 (10%)         55 (5.5%)
             Midlands                 15,599 (21%)               2,559 (17%)          3,703 (22%)        9,068 (22%)        269 (27%)
             North East and
                                      10,310 (14%)               2,236 (15%)          2,225 (13%)        5,773 (14%)         76 (7.6%)
             Yorkshire
             North West               12,930 (17%)               2,178 (14%)          3,296 (19%)        7,311 (17%)        145 (15%)
             Scotland                  3,068 (4.1%)               606 (4.0%)           573 (3.4%)        1,846 (4.4%)        43 (4.3%)
             South East                9,450 (13%)               2,131 (14%)          1,974 (12%)        5,052 (12%)        293 (29%)
             South West                3,919 (5.2%)               726 (4.8%)           795 (4.7%)        2,361 (5.6%)        37 (3.7%)
             Wales                     3,623 (4.8%)               713 (4.7%)           893 (5.3%)        1,991 (4.7%)        26 (2.6%)
       1
        Statistics presented:
       median (IQR); n (%)
                                                                            26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Table 2: Validation performance in held-out London region.
          Models are shown for prediction of in-hospital clinical deterioration and are sorted by C-statistic (total
          sample size = 8252 participants). CITL = calibration-in-the-large. ‘Original outcome’ column indicates
          original intended outcome for each candidate model during development. CITL and slopes are not
          shown for points score models since they are not on probability scale.
                       Score                  Original outcome               C-statistic                  CITL               Slope
          4C Deterioration          Deterioration (in-hospital)      0.77 (0.75 - 0.78)     0.01 (-0.04 - 0.06)   0.96 (0.9 - 1.02)
                            37
                  NEWS2                  Deterioration (1 day)        0.69 (0.68 - 0.7)
                            38
           Zhang "death"                 Mortality (in-hospital)     0.67 (0.66 - 0.69)      2.26 (2.19 - 2.32) 0.19 (0.16 - 0.22)
                             9
              4C Mortality               Mortality (in-hospital)     0.67 (0.66 - 0.68)
                            38
            Zhang "poor"            Deterioration (in-hospital)      0.67 (0.66 - 0.68)       0.54 (0.48 - 0.6) 0.15 (0.13 - 0.18)
                            39
                   REMS                  Mortality (in-hospital)     0.66 (0.65 - 0.68)
                            40
            DS-CURB65                       Mortality (30 days)      0.66 (0.65 - 0.67)
                            41
                 A-DROP                     Mortality (30 days)      0.65 (0.64 - 0.66)
                            20
                 CURB65                     Mortality (30 days)      0.65 (0.64 - 0.66)
                            42
                   MEWS             Deterioration (in-hospital)      0.63 (0.62 - 0.64)
                            43
                  qSOFA                  Mortality (in-hospital)     0.63 (0.62 - 0.64)
                            44
                         Lu                 Mortality (12 days)      0.62 (0.61 - 0.63)
                                                                        27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Figure 1: Multivariable associations between selected predictors and outcome in final model
          Variable selection was done in each imputed dataset using backward elimination within each NHS
          region using AIC. Variables retained in >50% of multiply imputed datasets in >50% of NHS regions
          were selected. Continuous variables are modelled using restricted cubic splines. Final model
          parameters are pooled across multiply imputed datasets (total sample size for model development =
          66764 participants). Black lines indicate point estimates; grey shaded regions indicate 95%
          confidence intervals.
                                                                       28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Figure 2: Internal-external cross validation of selected model by NHS region.
          Pooled estimates are calculated through random-effects meta-analysis (total sample size = 66,764
          participants). Dashed lines indicate lines of perfect calibration in the large (0) and slope (1),
          respectively. Black squares indicate point estimates; bars indicate 95% confidence intervals;
          diamonds indicate pooled random-effects meta-analysis estimates.
                                                                       29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Figure 3: Calibration and decision curve analysis in held-out London region
          Calibration (a) is shown using a loess-smoother across multiply imputed datasets. The rug plot
          indicates the distribution of predicted risk. Net benefit (b) is shown with loess smoothing for each
          candidate model compared to the ‘treat all’ and ‘treat none’ approaches. Points score models are
          recalibrated to the validation data, resulting in optimistic estimates of net benefit for these models.
          Total sample size = 8,252 participants).
                                                                       30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
          Figure 4: 4C Deterioration vs Mortality predictions for (a) London validation cohort (n = 8252)
          and (b-c) randomly sampled example patients.
          4C Mortality probabilities are calculated from points scores, based on observed mortality risk for each
          score in the original validation data. In panel (a) smoothed plot reflects loess fit, stratified by age
          (green = under 50 years; yellow = 50 to 69; red = 70 or older). In panel (b), example patients are
          randomly sampled from the validation cohort, stratified by deciles of 4C Deterioration model
          predictions. Characteristics of each example participant are shown in (c), with red indicating
          characteristics associated with higher risk predictions. In (c), M = male; F = female; O2 = receiving
          oxygen therapy; RA = room air; Y = yes; N = no.
                                                                       31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted October 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
  (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                          It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
                                                                       32

                        0.6                                                                         0.6                                                                            0.6                                                                      0.6
Risk of deterioration                                                    Risk of deterioration                                                             Risk of deterioration                                                    Risk of deterioration
                        0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                            0.4                                                                      0.4
                        0.2                                                                         0.2                                                                            0.2                                                                      0.2
                               40              60             80                                                    10             20            30                                      0           100               200    300                                      1         2          3
                                         Age (years)                                                                    Urea (mmol/L)                                                        C−reactive protein (mg/L)                                            Lymphocytes (x10^9/L)
                                                                         Radiographic infiltrates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
Glasgow coma scale                                                                                                                                         Nosocomial infection                                                     Risk of deterioration
                        <15                           ●                                             Yes                     ●                                                      Yes                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                         15                ●                                                         No                 ●                                                          No                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                   0.2          0.4            0.6                                                0.2            0.4        0.6                                                0.2                 0.4       0.6                                  80       85   90     95       100
                                   Risk of deterioration                                                          Risk of deterioration                                                        Risk of deterioration                                                        SpO2 (%)
                                                                                                    0.6
Room air or oxygen                                                       Risk of deterioration
                         Oxygen                           ●                                                                                                                          Male                      ●
                                                                                                    0.4                                                    Sex
                        Room air                ●                                                                                                                                  Female                  ●
                                                                                                    0.2
                                         0.2        0.4            0.6                                    15      20        25         30   35        40                                             0.2               0.4   0.6
                                     Risk of deterioration                                                     Respiratory rate (per min)                                                        Risk of deterioration

East of England                          0.76 [0.75, 0.77]                             0.07 [ 0.02, 0.12]                        0.99 [0.93, 1.05]
Midlands                                 0.76 [0.75, 0.77]                          −0.05 [−0.09, −0.01]                         1.00 [0.96, 1.04]
North East and Yorkshire                 0.77 [0.76, 0.78]                            0.04 [−0.01, 0.08]                         1.06 [1.01, 1.11]
North West                               0.76 [0.75, 0.77]                           −0.02 [−0.06, 0.02]                         0.99 [0.95, 1.04]
Scotland                                 0.76 [0.74, 0.78]                          −0.20 [−0.28, −0.11]                         0.97 [0.88, 1.06]
South East                               0.75 [0.74, 0.76]                             0.09 [ 0.04, 0.14]                        0.95 [0.90, 1.00]
South West                               0.76 [0.75, 0.78]                          −0.19 [−0.26, −0.11]                         0.98 [0.90, 1.07]
Wales                                    0.76 [0.74, 0.78]                             0.13 [ 0.06, 0.21]                        0.98 [0.88, 1.07]
Meta−analysis                            0.76 [0.75, 0.77]                           −0.01 [−0.11, 0.09]                         0.99 [0.97, 1.02]
                 0.7       0.75      0.8                   −0.3         0           0.3                   0.8 0.9     1      1.1   1.2
                         C−statistic                         Calibration in the large                         Calibration slope

a                                                                   b
                1.00                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                        4C Deterioration
                                                                                                                                        All
                                                                                  0.4
                0.75                                                                                                                    None
                                                                                                                                        A−DROP
                                                                                                                                        CURB65
Observed risk
                                                                                  0.3
                                                                    Net Benefit
                                                                                                                                        DS−CURB65
                                                                                                                                        4C Mortality
                0.50
                                                                                                                                        Lu
                                                                                  0.2                                                   MEWS
                                                                                                                                        NEWS2
                                                                                                                                        qSOFA
                0.25
                                                                                                                                        REMS
                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                        Zhang death
                                                                                                                                        Zhang poor
                0.00                                                              0.0
                       0.00   0.25       0.50         0.75   1.00                       0.0   0.1      0.2       0.3        0.4   0.5
                                     Predicted risk                                                 Threshold Probability

a
                                                                   Age (years)
                                                                                               20 40 60 80 100
                                          100
                             medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.09.20209957.this version posted
                               (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted m
                                                                       It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 Interna
                                                                                                                              ●●●●  ●●  ●●
                                                                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                                                                        ●    ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                                               ●●●
                                            75                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                ●  ●●●●  ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                                ●●
Mortality risk (%)
                                                                                                         ●● ●●
                                                                                                             ●●● ●
                                                                                                              ●  ●●●●
                                                                                                                    ●●●●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                         ●● ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ● ●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                                           ● ●●
                                                                                            ● ●● ●
                                                                                                 ● ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                             ●●●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                         ●●●●●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●●●
                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●●●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                        ● ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                                        ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●   ●
                                            50
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●  ●
                                                                                  ●●●●
                                                                                     ●●●●
                                                                                      ●● ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●●●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●●
                                                                                                                                          ●●●●
                                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                            ●●●
                                                                           ●● ● ●
                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●●●
                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                            ● ●●
                                                                     ●●●●
                                                                     ●  ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●●
                                                                          ●●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●  ●●
                                                                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                                                               ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                 ●● ●●
                                                                    ●  ●
                                                                      ●●●●
                                                                        ●●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●  ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●●
                                                                                                                                        ●●●●
                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                           ●●●●
                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                               ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                            25                  ●●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●●●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                        ● ●●
                                                                                                                                           ●●●●
                                                                                                                                            ●●●●●● ●●
                                                                ●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                   ●●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                                             ●●●●●●●●●
                                                             ●●●●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                   ●●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ● ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                 ●●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                        ●●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                            ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                 ●  ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●  ●●●● ● ●
                                                            ●● ●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                   ●●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                       ● ●
                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                                            ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                                                   ● ●●●●●● ●●●
                                                            ●
                                                            ●●
                                                            ● ●●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●●
                                                                    ●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●
                                                                           ●●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                           ●●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                                                           ●●●●●
                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                                 ● ●●●●● ●        ●
                                                            ●
                                                            ●●
                                                             ●●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●●
                                                               ●●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                   ●●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                   ●●●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                       ●●
                                                                                                        ●●●
                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●  ●●
                                                                                                             ●●●  ● ●●● ●
                                                           ●
                                                           ●●
                                                            ●●●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                   ●●
                                                                    ●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                      ●●●●
                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ● ●●●● ● ●
                                                                                               ●     ●●  ●● ● ● ●
                                              0          ●●
                                                          ●
                                                          ●●●
                                                           ●●
                                                           ●
                                                           ●●
                                                            ●
                                                            ●●
                                                             ●●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                 ●●
                                                                 ● ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                   ●●
                                                                    ●
                                                                    ●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●●
                                                                            ●●●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                        ●●●
                                                                                          ●●  ●
                                                   0                      25       50         75                                                 100
                                                                          Deterioration risk (%)
b
                                                               ●        4C Deterioration                       ●         4C Mortality
                                          100
                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                            75                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                              ●
Risk (%)
                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                            50                                                           ●
                                                                                                                    ●                    ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                   ●
                                            25                           ●         ●          ●          ●
                                                              ●          ●
                                                   ●
                                                                                                                              ●
                                              0 ●             ●
                                                   1          2          3          4      5 6 7                               8         9         10
                                                                                         Participant
c                                  Age (years)     41         36         77        84         70         60         76        56         88         80
                                            Sex     M         M          F          F          M          F         M          M          F         M
                      Number of comorbidities       0          0          1         1          0          2          2         0          4          2
                          Nosocomial infection      N          N         N          N          N          N         N          N          N          N
                       Radiographic infiltrates     Y          Y         Y          N          Y          Y         N          Y          Y          Y
                     Respiratory rate (per min)    21         18         36        17         22         24         30        26         24         28
                                     SpO2 (%)      98         95         99        92         93         96         91        95         86         91
                           Room air or oxygen      RA        RA         RA         RA         RA        RA         O2         O2         O2         O2
                         Glasgow coma scale        15         15         15       <15         15        <15         15        15         15         15
                                Urea (mmol/L)       5          3          6         6          6         18          5         9          6         13
                     C−reactive protein (mg/L)     31         68         12        25        104         42         70       120        160        118
                       Lymphocytes (x10^9/L)       0.8       0.4        0.9        0.6        0.7         1        8.4        0.9        1.1       0.7
